Human Vitamin and
Mineral Requirements
Report of a joint FAO/WHO
Food and Nutrition Division
expert consultation
Bangkok, Thailand
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
World Health Organization
FAO Rome
The designations employed and the presentation of material in
this information product do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of
any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concern-
ing the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this
information product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are
authorized without any prior written permission from the copyright holders
provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this
information product for resale or other commercial purposes is prohibited
without written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such
permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing and Multimedia
Service, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100
Rome, Italy or by e-mail to copyright@fao.org
© FAO  2001
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          iii
T
he report of this joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral
requirements has been long in coming. The consultation was held in Bangkok in
September 1998, and much of the delay in the publication of the report has been due to
controversy related to final agreement about the recommendations for some of the
micronutrients. A priori one would not anticipate that an evidence based process and a topic
such as this is likely to be controversial. But the reality is that there is surprisingly little data
on specific health status indicators on which to draw conclusions, whereas there is more
information in relation to overt deficiency disease conditions. The recommended intakes are
therefore largely based on the interpretation of the best available scientific information, and
this leaves the door open for differences in interpretation.
A fundamental point is that when we look at recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) in
industrialized countries over the last 25 years, the levels for some of the micronutrients have
been gradually increasing. The question is whether this comes from better scientific
knowledge and understanding of the biochemical role of the nutrients, or whether the criteria
for setting the levels of the requirements have changed. Even if the scientific knowledge base
has expanded, it appears that the basic criteria for deciding on levels to recommend may bear
more of the responsibility. Whereas RNIs for vitamins and minerals were initially established
on the understanding that they are meant to meet the basic nutritional needs of over 97 percent
of the population, a fundamental criterion in industrialized countries has become one of
presumptive role these nutrients may play in the “prevention” against an increasing range of
disease conditions that characterise these populations. The latter approach implies the notion
of “optimal nutrition”, and this may be insidiously pushing requirements to higher levels time
and again.
This shift in the goal for setting RNIs is not without reason. The populations that are
targeted for prevention through “optimal nutrition” are characterised by sedentary lifestyles
and longer life expectations. The populations of developed countries are ageing, and the
concern for the health of the ageing has become prominent. By contrast the micronutrient
needs of developing countries as a whole have not really changed, and are more appropriately
described as those that will satisfy basic needs of younger populations that are physically
active. This, nevertheless, is not to deny the double burden of malnutrition, which is rapidly
rising in many developing countries, and one needs to also bear that in mind.
The concern raised about possible differences in micronutrient needs of populations
with different lifestyles is for a very practical reason. The logic behind the establishment of
micronutrient needs of industrialized nations has come about at the same time that there is a
large and growing demand for a variety of supplements of all kinds, and manufacturers have
responded quickly to meet this market. This phenomenon could be skewing our strategy for
nutritional development, with a tendency to want to resolve micronutrient deficiency
problems of developing countries through the use of supplements and fortification strategies,
rather than through increasing the consumption of an adequate and varied diet. Higher levels
of RNIs in developed countries can easily be supported because they can be met with
supplementation in addition to food. But when it becomes difficult to meet some of the
micronutrient needs of developing countries by consuming locally available food, there is a
problem.
Foreword
iv                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
The nutrients of concern currently are, first, calcium, for which the RNI may be
difficult to meet without dairy products. The recently revised US/Canada Dietary Reference
Intakes (DRIs) only propose an Acceptable Intake (AI) for calcium, instead of a
Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA), in recognition of the fact that intake data is out of
step with the relatively high intake requirements observed with experimentally derived values.
Another is iron, particularly during pregnancy, where supplementation appears to be essential
during the second half of pregnancy. Folic acid requirements are doubled for women of
child-bearing age to prevent the incidence of neural tube defects in the foetus. Conversion
factors for carotenoids are under review, with the looming conclusion that servings of green
leafy vegetables needed to meet vitamin A requirements would probably need to be at least
doubled. In view of this uncertainty, we have only provided for “recommended safe intakes”
rather than RNIs. Selenium is undergoing growing interest because of its properties as an
antioxidant. The RNIs recommended from the FAO/WHO process for this micronutrient are
in a lower range than that provided by the US/Canada process because the latter is calculated
on a cellular basis, whereas the former are based on the more traditional whole body
estimates.
Are these “developments” or “new understandings” appropriate and applicable for
developing countries? There is no clear answer based on our current knowledge, but the time
may be coming when RNIs will need to be seen differently for developing countries, and
based on developing country data. There may be a need to identify some biomarkers that are
specific to developing country conditions. There is therefore an urgent need for research to be
carried out in developing countries about their nutrient needs. The current situation also
implies that the RNIs for the micronutrients of concern discussed above will need to be
re-evaluated as soon as significant additional data becomes available.
Guy Nantel
FAO Coordinator for the expert consultation
Food and Nutrition Division
Director 
Food and Nutrition Division
Kraisid Tontisirin
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          v
Foreword
i
Participating experts
xiiiii
Background paper contributors
xvii
Background paper reviewers
xix
Consultants
xxi
Secretariat
xxii
Chapter 1
Introduction
     
     1 
Background
1
Terms of reference and process
1
Definitions of terms used
2
Report of the consultation
4
References
     6
Chapter 2  
Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs 
     7
Dietary diversification when consuming cereal and tuber-based diets
9
How to accomplish dietary diversity in practice
10
Practices which will enhance the success of food-based approaches
11
Delineating the role of supplementation and food fortification for 
nutrients which cannot be supplied by regular foods
12
Recommendations for the future
15
Future research
16
References
   25
Chapter 3
Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin 
   27
Thiamin
28
Riboflavin
31
Niacin
33
Vitamin B6
36
Pantothenate
38
Biotin
40
General considerations for B-complex vitamins
42
References
   44
Chapter 4  
Folate and folic acid
  
   53
Role of folate and folic acid in human metabolic processes
53
Definition of populations at risk for folate deficiency
57
Delineation of dietary sources
57
Evidence on which to base a recommended intake
57
Differences in bio-availability of folic acid and food folate
59
Neural tube defects
59
Cardiovascular disease
60
Colorectal cancer
60
Upper limit
60
Future research
60
References
   62
CONTENTS
vi                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
Chapter 5
Vitamin B12
   65
Role of vitamin B12 in human metabolic processes
65
Dietary sources and availability
65
Absorption
65
Populations at risk for and consequences of vitamin B12 deficiency
66
Vitamin B12 interaction with folate or folic acid
67
Assessment of vitamin  B12  status
68
Evidence on which to base a recommended intake
68
Future research
70
References
   71
Chapter 6
Vitamin C
   73
Role in human metabolic processes
73
Overview of significant scientific information
74
Definition of population at risk
75
Dietary sources of vitamin C and limitations to vitamin C
76
Information used to derive dietary requirement of vitamin C
77
Future research
80
References
   81
Chapter 7
Vitamin A
   87
Role of vitamin A in human metabolic processes
87
Population at risk and consequences of vitamin A deficiency
89
Units of expression
92
Dietary sources
93
Evidence for making recommendations
95
Determining mean requirements and setting safe levels of intake
97
Recommended safe intakes
99
Toxicity
100
Future research
101
References
   
 102
Chapter 8 
Vitamin D
 109
Summary of the role of vitamin D in human metabolic processes
109
Overview of the role of vitamin D
109
Populations at risk for vitamin D deficiency
111
Evidence used for estimating recommended vitamin D intake
114
Considerations in viewing recommended intakes for vitamin D
115
Summary of the RNIs for vitamin D by age group
116
Vitamin D toxicity
116
Future research
117
References
 118
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          vii
Chapter 9  
Vitamin E
 121
Summary of the role of vitamin E in human metabolic processes
121
Defining populations at risk of vitamin E deficiency
123
Delineation of dietary sources and possible limitations to its availability worldwide
125
Summary of evidence for determining recommended nutrient intakes
126
Future research
127
References
 129
Chapter 10
Vitamin K
 133
Biological role of vitamin K
133
Overview of metabolism
135
Populations at risk
136
Dietary sources
138
Bio-availability of vitamin K from foods
139
Importance of intestinal bacterial synthesis as a source of vitamin K
139
Evidence on which recommendations can be based
140
Recommendations for vitamin K intakes
144
Toxicity
146
Future research
146
References
 147
Chapter 11
Calcium
 151 
Chemistry and distribution of calcium
151
Biological role of calcium
152
Determinants of calcium balance
153
Calcium absorption 
154
Calcium requirements and recommended intakes 
157 
Populations at risk
159
Recommendations by group
159
Ethnic and environmental variations in the prevalence of osteoporosis
164
Nutritional factors affecting calcium requirements
166
Conclusions
170
Future research
171
References
 172
Chapter 12
Iodine
 181
Summary of the human metabolic processes requiring iodine
181
Overview of significant scientific information
181
Population at risk
183
Dietary sources
183
Recommended intake
184
Upper limit of iodine intake for different age groups
188
Iodine fortification
190
Recommendations
191
References
 192
viii                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
Chapter 13
Iron
 195
The role of iron in human metabolic processes
195
Iron requirements
195
Iron absorption
199
Iron deficiency
204
Iron during pregnancy and lactation
209
Iron supplementation and fortification
212
The evidence for estimating the recommended nutrient intake for iron
212
Recommendations for iron intake for infants, children, younger and 
older adults, and pregnant and lactating women
214
Future research
214
References
 216
Chapter 14
Magnesium
 223
Tissue distribution and functions of magnesium
223
Origins and effects of magnesium deficiency
223
Dietary sources, absorption, and excretion of magnesium
224
Criteria for assessing magnesium requirements and allowances
225
Estimated allowances of magnesium
226
Derivation of allowances for magnesium
226
Upper tolerable limits of magnesium intake
228
Relationships to previous estimates
229
Future research
229
References
 230
Chapter 15
Selenium
 235
The role of selenium in human metabolic processes
235
Selenium deficiency
237
The influence of diet on selenium status
240
Absorption and bio-availability
240
Criteria for assessing selenium requirements
244
Recommended selenium intakes
245
Future research
248
References
 250
Chapter 16
Zinc
 257
Role of zinc in human metabolic processes
257
Zinc metabolism and homeostasis
257
Dietary sources and availability of zinc
258
Populations at risk for zinc deficiency
259
Zinc requirements
261
Inter-individual variations in zinc requirements and recommended nutrient intakes
262
Upper limits of zinc intake
264
Adequacy of zinc intakes in relation to requirement estimates
266
Conclusion
266
Future research
267
References
 268
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          ix
Chapter 17
Dietary antioxidants: a consideration of factors influencing requirements
 
 271
Nutrients with an antioxidant role
271
The need for biologic antioxidants
271
Pro-oxidant activity of biologic antioxidants
274
Nutrients associated with endogenous antioxidant mechanisms
274
Nutrients with radical-quenching properties
275
A requirement for antioxidant nutrients
 279
References
 281
x
                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
1. White rice and corn-tortilla based diets composition and  
nutrient density values per 1000 kcals  for vitamin A, 
vitamin C, folate, iron and zinc 
21
2. Refined couscous and potato based diets composition and 
      nutrient density values per 1000 kcal for vitamin  A, 
      vitamin C, folate, iron and zinc 
22
3. White rice and corn-tortilla  based diets composition and
      percentage of  nutrient density values for vitamin A, 
      vitamin C, folate, iron and zinc 
23
4. Refined couscous and potato based diets composition and 
      percentage of nutrient density values for vitamin A, 
      vitamin C, folate, iron and zinc 
24
5. Physiologic roles and deficiency signs of B-complex vitamins
27
6. Recommended nutrient intakes for thiamin
30
7. Recommended nutrient intakes for riboflavin
33
8. Recommended nutrient intakes for niacin
35
9. Recommended nutrient intakes for vitamin B6
38
10. Recommended nutrient intakes for pantothenate
40
11. Recommended nutrient intakes for biotin
42
12. Dietary sources of water-soluble vitamins 
43
13. Estimated average requirement (EAR) and recommended 
      nutrient intake (RNI) for folic acid expressed as dietary 
      folate equivalents, by age group
58
14. Estimated average requirement (EAR) and recommended 
        
nutrient intake (RNI) for vitamin B12, by age group
69
15. Recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) for vitamin C
79
16. Available supply of vitamin A by WHO region
95
17. Biochemical indicators of sub-clinical VAD
in mothers and in children 6–71 months of age
96
18. Estimated mean requirement and safe level of intake for vitamin A
100
TABLES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          xi
19. Randomised, controlled trials with dietary vitamin D supplements
          113
20. Preliminary unweighted results from NHANES III data
          114
21. RNIs for vitamin D according to age groups
          116
22. Approximate biological activity of naturally occurring tocopherols
and tocotrienols compared with d-α-tocopherol
          123
23. Diseases and syndromes in animals associated with vitamin E deficiency
and excess intakes of polyunsaturated fatty acids
    
          124
24. Cross-country correlations between coronary heart disease 
      mortality in men and the supply of vitamin E homologues 
      across 24 European countries
125
25. Vitamin E content (mg tocopherol/100g) in vegetable oils
126
26. Classification of vitamin K deficiency bleeding of the newborn
137
27. Dietary intakes and plasma levels of phylloquinone
      in human-milk-fed versus formula-fed infants aged 0–6 months
141
28. Mean dietary intakes of phylloquinone from US Food and Drug Administration
143
29. Recommended nutrients intakes for vitamin K
144
30. Protein and calcium intakes in different regions of the world 1987–1989
154
31. Recommended calcium allowances based on Western European,
      American and Canadian data
161
32. Current calcium intake recommendations (mg/day)
162
33. Theoretical calcium allowances based on an animal protein intake of 20–40 g
169
34. The spectrum of iodine deficiency disorders
183
35. Average iodine content of foods (in µg/g)
184
36. Iodine content of the inorganic world
185
37. Proposed revision for daily iodine intake recommendations of 1996 
      by the World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund, 
     and International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders
188
38. Recommended dietary intakes of iodine and probable safe upper limits   
190
xii                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
39. Iron intakes required for growth under the age of 18 years, median basal 
      iron losses, menstrual loses in women, and total absolute iron requirements 
196
40. The recommended nutrient intakes for iron
      based on varying dietary iron bio-availabilities
197
41. Factors influencing dietary iron absorption
200
42. Iron requirements during pregnancy
210
43. Examples of diet with different iron bio-availability
213
44. Translation of bio-availability expressed as amount of iron absorbed
      into percent absorbed for two levels of iron intake
213
45. Typical daily intakes of magnesium by infants (6 kg) and adults (65 kg)
224
46. Recommended nutrient intakes for magnesium (Mg) in milligrams (mg)
228
47. A selection of characterised selenoproteins
235
48. The selenium contents of foods and diets
241
49. Geographic differences in the selenium intakes of infants
242
50. Geographic differences in the selenium intakes (µg/day) of adults
243
51. Representative mean serum selenium concentration (µmol/l)
      in specific studies
244
52. Recommended nutrient intakes of selenium (µg/day)
246
53. Examples of fractional zinc absorption from total diets
      measured by isotope techniques
260
54. Criteria for categorising diets according to the potential availability of their zinc
263
55. Average individual normative requirements for zinc 
      (µg/kg body weight/day) from diets differing in zinc bio-availability
264
56. Recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) for dietary zinc (mg/day) 
      to meet the normative storage requirements from diets 
      differing in zinc bio-availability
265
57. Systems altered in disease which reduce risk of autoxidation
273
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          xiii
1. Distribution of requirements to prevent deficiency and toxicity
     4
2. Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet 
                
      of white rice and the addition of a variety of foods
   17
3. Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet 
    
     of corn-tortilla and the addition of a variety of foods
   18
4. Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet                                          
     of refined couscous and the addition of a variety of foods
   19
5. Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet 
of potatoes and the addition of a variety of foods
  
   20
6. The chemical formula of folic acid (synthetic form) and the 
most important natural folates
   54
7. The role of the folate co-factors in the DNA cycle and the methylation cycle     
   55
8. Relationship between intake and plasma concentrations of vitamin C
   77
9. Prevalence of VAD in the world
   90
10. Calcium homeostatis
 110
11. The vitamin K epoxide cycle
 134
12. Whole-body bone mineral (WB Min) (left axis) and calcium 
(right axis) as a function of age as determined by total-body 
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
152
13. Major calcium movements in the body
153
14. Relationship between calcium absorption and calcium intake
155
15. True and net calcium absorption as percents of calcium intake
156
16. a) Calcium output as a linear (A) function of calcium intake 
calculated from the same balances as Figure 14
158
16. b) Calcium output as a non-linear function of calcium intake 
calculated from the same balances as Figure 14
159
17. Calcium intakes required to provide the absorbed calcium necessary 
to meet calcium requirements at different stages in the lifecycle
160
18. The effect of varying protein or sodium intake on theoretical 
calcium requirement
 
167
FIGURES
xiv                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
19. The effect of varying calcium absorptive efficiency on theoretical 
calcium requirement
169
20. Simplified diagram of the metabolic circuit of iodine
182
21. Changes over time for the median urinary concentration 
of iodine in healthy Belgian infants aged 6–36 months and 
supplemented with iodine at 90 µg/kg/day for 44 weeks
186
22. Iron requirements of boys and girls
198
23. Distribution of daily iron requirements in menstruating adult 
women and teenagers: the probability of adequacy at different
amounts of iron absorbed
199
24. Effect of different amounts of calcium on iron absorption
202
25. Distribution of haemoglobin concentration in a sample
of 38-year-old women with and without stainable bone marrow iron
205
26. Daily iron requirements and daily dietary iron absorption in pregnancy
211
27. Vitamin C can donate a hydrogen atom and form a relatively 
     stable  ascorbyl free radical
278
Table 1     Recommended nutrient intakes – Minerals
287
Table 2     Recommended nutrient intakes –  Water and fat soluble vitamins
290
APPENDIX
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          xv
PROFESSOR CHEN CHUNMING
(Vice-chair)
Senior Adviser
Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine
27 Nan Wei Road
Beijing 100050, CHINA
C. GOPALAN, M.D., Ph.D.
President
Nutrition Foundation of India
C-13 Qutab Institutional Area
New Delhi 110 016, INDIA
LEIF HALLBERG, M.D., Ph.D.
Department of Clin Nutr.
Göteborg University 
Annedalsklinikerna
Sahlgrenska University Hospital
S-413-45 Göteborg, SWEDEN
GLENVILLE JONES, Ph.D.
Department of Biochemistry - Medicine
Room 668 Botterell Hall
Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, CANADA K7L 3N6
DONALD B. McCORMICK, Ph.D.
(Chairperson)
Department of Biochemistry
Emory University School of Medicine
4013 Rollins Research Center
Atlanta, GA 30322-3050, USA
JOHN SCOTT, Ph.D., D.Sc.
Department of Biochemistry
Trinity College
Dublin 2, IRELAND
Participating experts
COLIN F. MILLS, Ph.D.
Director, Postgraduate Studies
Rowett Research Institute
Bucksburn AB21 9SB, SCOTLAND, 
UNITED KINGDOM
B. CHRISTOPHER NORDIN, M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc.
Institute of Medical and Veterinary Sciences
Clin Biochem. Division
PO Box 14 Rundle Mall
Adelaide 5000, AUSTRALIA
RUTH ONIANG’O Ph.D.
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology
P.O. Box 62000
Nairobi, KENYA
CHANDRAKANT S. PANDAV, M.D., M.Sc.
Regional Coordinator,
South-Asia and Pacific International Council for Control
of Iodine Deficiency Disorders
Additional Professor, Center for Community Medicine
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
New Delhi, INDIA
BRITTMARIE SANDSTRÖM, Ph.D.
Research Department of Human Nutrition
The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University
Rolighedsvej 30
Frederiksberg DK-1958, DENMARK
RICARDO UAUY, M.D., Ph.D.
Director
Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology (INTA)
University of Chile
Casilla 138-11
Santiago, CHILE
xvi                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
MARTIN J. SHEARER, Ph.D.
Vitamin K Research Unit of the Haemophilia
Centre
The Rayne Institute
4t Floor, Lambeth Wing
St Thomas's Hospital
London SE1 7EH,
UNITED KINGDOM
DAVID THURNHAM, Ph.D.
Howard Professor of Human Nutrition
School of Biomedical Sciences
Northern Ireland Center for Diet and Health
University of Ulster
Coleraine, Co. Londonderry
UNITED KINGDOM
BARBARA UNDERWOOD, Ph.D.
Scholar-in-Residence
Food and Nutrition Board
Institute of Medicine, NAS
2101 Constitution Ave. N.W. (Fo 3049)
Washington, DC 20418, USA
PARVIN ZANDI, Ph.D.
Head, Department of Food Science and Technology
National Nutrition & Food Technology Research Institute
P.O. Box 19395-4741
Tehran, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          xvii
LEIF HALLBERG, M.D., Ph.D.
Department of Clin Nutr.
Göteborg University 
Annedalsklinikerna
Sahlgrenska University Hospital
S-413-45 Göteborg, SWEDEN
GLENVILLE JONES, Ph.D.
Department of Biochemistry -
Medicine
Room 668 Botterell Hall
Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario CANADA K7L 3N6
MADHU KARMARKAR, Ph.D.
Senior Advisor
International Council for Control of
Iodine Deficiency Disorders
New Delhi 110 029 INDIA
MARK A. LEVINE, M.D. 
NIDDK, NIH 
Bldg 10, Rm 4D52 
MSC1372
Bethesda, MD 20892-1372, USA
DONALD B. McCORMICK, Ph.D. 
Department of Biochemistry
Emory University School of Medicine
4013 Rollins Research Center
Atlanta, GA 30322-3050, USA
COLIN F. MILLS, Ph.D.
Director, Postgraduate Studies
Rowett Research Institute
Bucksburn AB21 9SB, Scotland, 
UNITED KINGDOM
Background paper contributors
B. CHRISTOPHER NORDIN, M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc.
Institute of Medical and Veterinary Sciences
Clin Biochem. Division
PO Box 14 Rundle Mall
Adelaide 5000 AUSTRALIA
MARIA THERESA OYARZUM, M.S.
Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology (INTA)
University of Chile
Casilla 138-11
Santiago, CHILE
CHANDRAKANT S. PANDAV, M.D., M.Sc.
Regional Coordinator,
South-Asia and Pacific International Council for Control of
Iodine Deficiency Disorders
Additional Professor, 
Center for Community Medicine
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
New Delhi 110 029 INDIA
BRITTMARIE SANDSTRÖM, Ph.D.
Research Department of Human Nutrition
The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University
Rolighedsvej 30
Frederiksberg 
DK-1958 DENMARK
JOHN SCOTT, Ph.D., D.Sc.
Department of Biochemistry
Trinity College
Dublin 2, IRELAND
MARTIN J SHEARER, Ph.D.
Vitamin K Research Unit of the Haemophilia Centre
The Rayne Institute
4t Floor, Lambeth Wing
St Thomas's Hospital
London SE1 7EH, UNITED KINGDOM
xviii                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
AJAY SOOD, M.D., D.M.
Assistant Professor
Department of Endicrinology and Metabolism
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
New Delhi 110 029 INDIA
DAVID THURNHAM, Ph.D.
Howard Professor of Human Nutrition
School of Biomedical Sciences
Northern Ireland Center for Diet and Health
University of Ulster
Coleraine, Co. Londonderry
Northern Ireland BT52 1SA, 
UNITED KINGDOM
MARET G. TRABER, Ph.D.
Linus Pauling Institute
Department of Nutrition and Food Management
Oregon State University
571 Weniger Hall
Corvallis, OR 97331-6512 USA
RICARDO UAUY, M.D., Ph.D.
Director
Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology
(INTA)
University of Chile
Casilla 138-11
Santiago, CHILE
BARBARA UNDERWOOD, Ph.D.
Scholar-in-Residence
Food and Nutrition Board
Institute of Medicine, NAS
2101 Constitution Ave. N.W. (Fo 3049)
Washington, DC 20418, USA
CEES VERMEER, Ph.D. 
Faculteit der Geneeskunde Biochemie
Department of Biochemistry (Room 4.354) 
University of Maastricht
Post Office Box 616
6200 MD Maastricht
THE NETHERLANDS
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          xix
CHRISTOPHER BATES, Ph.D.
Medical Research Council
Downham's Lane
Milton Road
Cambridge, CB4 1XJ., 
UNITED KINGDOM
ROBERT E. BLACK, Ph.D.
Department of International Health
Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene
and Public Health
615 N. Wolfe Street, Room 5039
Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA
JAMES BLANCHARD, Ph.D.
Professor, Pharmaceutical Sciences
Room 106
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology 
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA
THOMAS H. BOTHWELL, M.D.
Faculty of Medicine
University of the Witwatersrand
Private Bag 3
Wits. 2050, SOUTH AFRICA
PROFESSOR CHEN CHUNMING 
Senior Adviser 
Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine 
27 Nan Wei Road
Beijing 100050, CHINA
WILLIAM COHN, Ph.D.
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd,
Division of Vitamins
Research and Technology Development
Building 72/47a
CH-4070 Basel, SWITZERLAND
Background paper reviewers
C. GOPALAN, M.D., Ph.D.
President
Nutrition Foundation of India
C-13 Qutab Institutional Area 
New Delhi 110 016, INDIA
ROBERT P.HEANEY, M.D.
Creighton University Medical Center
601 N. 30th Street (suite 4841)
Omaha, NE 68131, USA
BASIL S. HETZEL, M.D.
c/o Children’s Health Development
Foundation, 
8th Floor, Samuel Way Building
Women’s and Children’s Hospital
72 King William Road
North Adelaide, 5006 AUSTRALIA
WALTER MERTZ, MD
12401 St. James Road
Rockville, MD 20850, USA
RUTH ONIANG’O, Ph.D.
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture
and Technology
P.O. Box 62000 
Nairobi, KENYA
ROBERT S. PARKER, Ph.D.
Associate Professor
Division of Nutritional Sciences
Cornell University 
113 Savage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
xx                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
ROBERT M. RUSSELL, M.D.
Professor of Medicine and Nutrition 
Assoc. Dir., HNRC on Aging
Tufts U, USDA, ARS, 
711 Washington St,
Boston, MA 02111-1525, USA
TATSUO SUDA, Ph.D. 
Department of Biochemistry 
Showa University School of Dentistry 
1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku
Tokyo 142-8555, JAPAN
JOHN W. SUTTIE, Ph.D.
Dept. of Biochemistry
University of Wisconsin-Madison
420 Henry Mall
Madison, WI 53706-1569, USA
HENK VAN DEN BERG , Ph.D.
TNO
Nutrition and Food Research Institute 
Utrechtseweg 48
Zeist, 3700 AJ., NETHERLANDS
KEITH WEST, Jr., DrP.H., R.D.
Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and
Public Health
Division of Human Nutrition 
Room 2041
615 N. Wolfe Street
Baltimore, MD 21205-2179 USA
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          xxi
RICHARD DAWSON
Consultant
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
Bangkok, THAILAND
KRAISID TONTISIRIN, M.D., Ph.D.
Director
Institute of Nutrition
Mahidol University
Salaya, Phutthamonthon 4
Nakhon Panthmo 73170 THAILAND
Consultants
xxii                  FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
JOAN MARIE CONWAY, Ph.D., R.D.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome ITALY; and
USDA: Agricultural Research Service
Beltsville Human Nutr Res Center
Beltsville, MD 20705 USA
JOHN R. LUPIEN
Director, ESN Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome ITALY
BIPLAB NANDI, Ph.D.
Senior Food and Nutrition Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia & the Pacific
Bangkok 10200 THAILAND
SULTANA KHANUM, M.D., Ph.D. 
Regional Adviser/Nutrition
SEARO (South East Asia Regional Office)
World Health House 
Indraprastha Estate, Mahatma Gandhi Road
New Delhi 110002 INDIA
GUY NANTEL, Ph.D.
Senior Officer
Food and Nutrition Division (ESN)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome ITALY
ZEINA SIFRI, M.Sc.
Consultant
Food and Nutrition Division (ESN)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome ITALY
JOANNA PEDEN, M.Sc.
Public Health Nutrition Unit
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
49-51 Bedford Square
London, WC1B 3DP
UNITED KINGDOM
World Health Organization of the United
Nations
RATKO BUZINA, M.D., Ph.D.
Programme of Nutrition
World Health Organization of the UN
CH-1211 
Geneva 27 SWITZERLAND
GRAEME CLUGSTON, M.D., Ph.D.
Director, Programme of Nutrition
World Health Organization of the UN
CH-1211 
Geneva 27 SWITZERLAND
Secretariat
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          1
A
Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Food
Organization of the United Nations (FAO/WHO) expert consultation on human
vitamin and mineral requirements was held in the FAO Regional Office for Asia and
the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand, from 21 to 30 September 1998. The purpose of the
consultation was to complement the information, which had been provided through previous
consultations for different nutrients, in order to provide current knowledge on all essential
nutrients as the first step towards the production of a new edition of the manual on human
nutritional requirements.
Background
The Secretariat of the FAO and WHO organized the joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on
human vitamin and mineral requirements to review the FAO/WHO micronutrient
requirements and to develop recommended nutrient intakes. The report of the Expert
Consultation (this report) is being published as a technical document, and this will later serve
as the basis for developing a revised edition of the FAO/WHO handbook of human nutrition.
Consultations such as this one are part of a continuing commitment by both FAO and
WHO to promote a reliable, nutritious, and safe food supply and to provide scientifically
sound nutritional advice to Member Nations. This commitment was recently reaffirmed by the
World Food Summit in November 1996 in Rome.
Written documents providing the criteria that were used in the past to develop the
FAO/WHO RNIs were made available to the experts. These documents included the 1974
FAO/WHO handbook on human nutritional requirements, the 1988 FAO/WHO expert
consultation report on the requirements for vitamin A, iron, folate, and vitamin B12, and the
1996 WHO/FAO/IAEA report on trace elements in human nutrition and health. 
For the purpose of preparation of the background papers, the following working
definition of a recommended nutrient intake (RNI) was used. The RNI is the intake level
sufficient to meet the daily nutrient requirements of most individuals in a specific life-stage
and gender group and is based on an estimated average nutrient requirement (EAR) plus two
standard deviations above the mean: RNI = EAR + 2SDEAR.
Terms of reference and process
The terms of reference for the Expert Panel were the following:
 To review the full scope of vitamin and minerals requirements, including their role in
normal human physiology and metabolism and in deficiency disease conditions. To focus
on the requirements of the essential vitamins and minerals, including vitamins A, C, D, E,
and K; the B vitamins; calcium; iron; magnesium; zinc; selenium; and iodine.
 To draft and adopt a report which would provide recommended nutrient intakes for
vitamins A, C, D, E, and K; the B vitamins; calcium; iron; magnesium; zinc; selenium;
and iodine. The report would provide practical advice and recommendations which will
constitute an authoritative source of information to all those from member countries who
work in the area of nutrition, agriculture, food production and distribution, and health
Chapter 1
Introduction
2                                                                                                           Chapter 1:  Introduction
promotion. This report will form, in large part, the basis for a new edition of the
FAO/WHO Handbook on Human Nutritional Requirements, which was published in 1974
and last re-issued in 1980.
 To identify key issues for future research and make preliminary recommendations for the
handbook.
The presentations addressed changes in the science base for each of the essential
vitamin and mineral nutrients from the time of the most recent FAO/WHO review of those
nutrients. The Expert Panel made recommendations for the nutrient requirements, identified
key issues for future research, and made preliminary recommendations for the handbook.
Definitions of terms used
The following definitions relate to the nutrient intake from food (including water) that is
required to prevent deficiency conditions. Upper limits of nutrient intake are defined for
specific vitamins and minerals where there is a potential problem with excess.
Requirement
A requirement is an intake level, which will meet specified criteria of adequacy, preventing
risk of deficit or excess. These criteria include a gradient of biological effects related to the
nutrient intake. This dose response will be assumed to have a Gaussian distribution unless it is
known to be otherwise. A risk function (a probability of 0 to 1) of deficiency and excess can
be derived (Figure 1).
The relevance of the biological effects starts with the most extreme case, that is, the
prevention of death. For nutrients where sufficient data on mortality are not available, the
nutrient intake that prevents clinical disease or sub-clinical pathological conditions, identified
by biochemical or functional assays, is used. The next sets of biomarkers that are used to
define requirements include measures of nutrient stores or critical tissue pools. Intakes to
assure replete body stores are important when deficiency conditions are highly prevalent.
Presently, approaches to define requirements of most nutrients use several criteria examined
in combination, functional assays of sub-clinical conditions are considered the most relevant.
These biomarkers ideally should be sensitive to changes in nutritional state while at the same
time be specific in terms of identifying sub-clinical deficiency conditions. The use of nutrient
balance to define requirements has been avoided whenever possible. However, in the absence
of other criteria it has been used. In most cases, balance based on input-output measurements
are greatly influenced by level of intake, that is, subjects adjust to high intakes by increasing
output, conversely they lower output when intake is low. Thus, if sufficient time is provided
balance can be achieved at multiple levels of intake. The same can be said of nutrient blood
levels, they usually will reflect level of intake and absorption rather than functional state.
Unless balance or plasma level is related to abnormal function or disease conditions, they are
inadequate for use as a criteria to support the definition of requirements. Where relevant,
requirement estimates should include allowance for variations in bio-availability.
Recommended nutrient intake
Recommended nutrient intake (RNI) is the daily intake, which meets the nutrient
requirements of almost all (97.5 percent) apparently healthy individuals in an age and sex-
specific population group. Daily intake corresponds to the average over a period of time.
Criteria to establish requirements used in this report will be nutrient specific. The estimation
of RNI starts with the definition of the criteria for requirement and adds corrections for
physiologic and dietary factors. The average requirement value obtained from a group of
individuals is then adjusted for inter-individual variability. If the distribution of values is not
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          3
known, a Gaussian distribution is assumed, that is, a mean plus 2 SD is expected to cover 97.5
percent of the population. If the SD is not known, a value based on each nutrient’s physiology
is used. In most cases a variation in the range of 10-12.5 percent was assumed; exceptions are
noted within chapters. The definition of RNI used in this report is equivalent to that of
recommended dietary allowance (RDA) as used by the Food and Nutrition Board of the US
National Academy of Sciences (1).
Apparently healthy
Apparently healthy refers to the absence of disease based on clinical signs and symptoms and
function, normally assessed by routine laboratory methods and physical evaluation.
Upper tolerable nutrient intake level
Upper tolerable nutrient intake levels (ULs) have been defined for some nutrients. ULs are the
maximum intake from food that is unlikely to pose risk of adverse health effects from excess
in almost all (97.5 percent) apparently healthy individuals in an age and sex-specific
population group. ULs should be based on long-term exposure from food, including fortified
food products. For most nutrients no adverse effects are anticipated when they are consumed
as foods, because their absorption and or excretion are regulated. The special situation of
consumption of nutritional supplements which when added to the nutrient intake from food
may exceed the UL will be addressed in the specific chapters. The ULs as presented here do
not meet the strict definition of no observed effect level used in health risk assessment by
toxicologists because in most cases a dose-response curve for risk from total exposure to a
nutrient will not be available. For more details on how to derive ULs, see the model presented
in Nutrition Reviews (2).
The range of intakes encompassed by the RNI and UL should be considered sufficient
to prevent deficiency while avoiding toxicity. If no UL can be derived from experimental or
observational data in humans, the UL can be defined from available data on upper range of
observed dietary intake of apparently healthy populations.
Protective nutrient intake
The concept of protective nutrient intake has been introduced in some cases to refer to an
amount greater than the RNI, which may be protective against a specified health or nutritional
risk of public health relevance (e.g., vitamin C intake with a meal to promote iron absorption
or folic acid to lower the risk of neural tube defects). The text will indicate when existing data
provide justifiable differences between RNI values and protective intake levels. These intakes are
expressed as a daily value or as an amount to be consumed within a meal.
4                                                                                                           Chapter 1:  Introduction
Figure 1
Distribution of requirements to prevent deficiency and toxicity
1
Probability
0.5
Deficiency
Toxicity
0
Report of the consultation
In welcoming the participants, Dr Nath, Assistant Director General, Regional Office for Asia
and the Pacific, (FAO), recalled the previous Consultation and publication on this subject
from 1974. That and the present Consultation are part of a long series of such expert
consultations, which have as a primary objective; a) the review of the state of knowledge on
the role of various nutrients in the human diet; and, b) the formulation of practical
recommendations where interpretation is needed or controversy exists. The most recent in this
series was the joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on carbohydrates in human nutrition held
in Rome in 1997.
Dr Nath spoke of the increasing evidence for the important role which vitamins and
minerals play in preventing disease and promoting overall health. Indeed, the understanding
of the role of micronutrients in foods and nutrition has significantly increased over the past 24
years. For many years the basic assumption – which still may be the best assumption – on
which nutritionists make their projections has been that all nutrients can be obtained from a
diet containing a variety of foods from a variety of sources. Some of the challenges to this
assumption rest in the complexities and diversity of worldwide realities, culture, and
traditions.
Dr Nath pointed out that for many people with access to an adequate energy intake, an
extensive freedom of choice exists in the selection of food. However, the existence of
widespread poverty in the majority of the UN member countries precludes the opportunity to
consume adequate energy let alone a diet balanced in micronutrients. He observed that the
increase in the availability of a wide variety of foods and especially “fast foods” in almost
every country in the world, coupled with the increasing pace of urban lifestyles across all
cultures and countries, does not necessarily result in adequate vitamin and mineral intake.
The existence of the dichotomies in lifespan was also mentioned by Dr Nath. In
different parts of the world and in different segments of society within the same countries,
there are broad ranges of life spans in part due to nutritional adequacy. Especially in urban
populations, as lifespan increases as a result of nutritional adequacy and despite improved
RNI
UL
Adequate Intake
Intake from food and water
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
          5
access to health care, an increase in obesity, diabetes, some forms of cancer, and
cardiovascular disease has been recorded in all regions of the globe. Although
epidemiological studies do not provide us with cause-and-effect explanations, they do provide
impetus for future research into the role of vitamins and minerals in the prevention and
management of some non-communicable diseases.
Dr Nath reminded the participants that they had been invited to the Consultation as
independent experts and that their participation in the Consultation was to be in their
individual capacity and not as a representative of any organization, affiliation, or government.
He underscored the importance of drawing conclusions and making recommendations based
on science, which is traceable to studies conducted largely in humans. This is necessary for
correct food labelling and relevant health claims and for the better use of foods in the dietary
management and prevention of non-communicable diseases. These issues have economic
implications for agricultural production, the food industry, and public health policy.
Dr Sultana Khanum, Regional Adviser/Nutrition, SEARO (South-East Asia Regional
Office), WHO, added her welcome on behalf of the Director-General of WHO, Dr Gro
Harlem Brundtland, and the Regional Director for South-East Asia Region, Dr Uton Muchtar
Raffle. Dr Khanum noted that the choice of South-East Asia as the site of the Expert
Consultation was significant because some of the most tangible successes and achievements
have occurred within this geographical region in the realm of identifying, preventing,
reducing, and eliminating many forms of malnutrition.
Dr Khanum noted that the FAO and WHO have a long history of collaboration at the
country, regional, and global levels towards combating food and nutritional problems. She
underlined the importance of using science as the basis of the standard setting process, which
took place during the consultation.
Dr Graeme Clugston, Director, WHO Nutrition Programmes, added his welcome to
the participants on behalf of the Director-General of WHO. Dr Clugston pointed out that the
formulation and implementation of science-based dietary guidelines have become a central
issue for the nutritional sciences as well as a major challenge for governments world wide,
especially since the International Conference on Nutrition held in Rome, December 1992.
Dr Clugston expressed confidence that this Expert Consultation would lead to
scientifically sound up-to-date recommendations for vitamin and mineral requirements in
human nutrition. FAO and WHO would then ensure that these recommendations would be
passed on to all Member States world wide, providing them with the best possible guidance
for developing their own appropriate dietary guidelines for health promotion, good nutrition,
and disease prevention.
The Consultation elected Dr Donald McCormick as chairperson and Professor Chen
Chunming as vice-chair. Dr Glenville Jones and Dr Colin Mills were appointed jointly as
rapporteurs. Dr McCormick in his response indicated the importance of this Consultation and
outlined the scope of the issues that would be discussed and on which the two agencies, FAO
and WHO, were seeking expert guidance from the Consultation.
Recommended nutrient intakes
Appendix 1 at the end of the report provides two composite tables summarising the
recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) for each of the vitamins and minerals. For the purposes
of preparing these tables the recommendations made by the experts were adjusted so that the
tables could be based on common body weights and age groups. Details are provided in the
footnote at the bottom of the tables.
6                                                                                                           Chapter 1:  Introduction
1. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. 1997. Dietary Reference Intakes:
Washington, DC, National Academy Press.
2. Anonymous. 1997. A Model for the Development of Tolerable Upper Intake Levels.
Nutr. Revs., 55: 342-351.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
7
Chapter 2
Food-based approaches to meeting
D
ietary patterns have varied over time depending on the agricultural practices and the
climatic, ecologic, cultural, and socio-economic factors, which determine available
foods. At present, virtually all dietary patterns adequately satisfy or even exceed the
nutritional needs of population groups. This is true except where socio-economic conditions
limit the capacity to produce and purchase food or aberrant cultural practices restrict the
choice of foods. It is thought that if people have access to a sufficient quantity and variety of
foods, they will meet their nutritional needs. The current practice of evaluating nutritive value
of diets should include not only energy and protein adequacy but also the micronutrient
density of the diet.
A healthy diet can be attained in more than one way because of the variety of foods,
which can be combined. It is thus difficult to define the ranges of intake for a specific food,
which should be included in a given combination to comply with nutritional adequacy. In
practice, the set of food combinations which is compatible with nutritional adequacy is restricted
by the level of food production sustainable in a given ecologic and population setting. In
addition, there are economic constraints, which limit food supply at household level. The
development of food-based dietary guidelines (FBDGs) by the FAO and WHO (1) recognises
this and focuses on the combination of foods that can meet nutrient requirements rather than on
how each specific nutrient is provided in adequate amounts.
The first step in the process of setting dietary guidelines is defining the significant diet-
related public health problems in a community. Once these are defined, the adequacy of the diet
is evaluated by comparing the information available on dietary intake with recommended
nutrient intakes (RNIs). Nutrient intake goals under this situation are specific for a given
ecologic setting, and their purpose is to promote overall health, control specific nutritional
diseases (whether they are induced by an excess or deficiency of nutrient intake), and reduce the
risk of diet-related multi-factorial diseases. Dietary guidelines represent the practical way to
reach the nutritional goals for a given population. They take into account the customary dietary
pattern and indicate what aspects should be modified. They consider the ecologic setting, socio-
economic and cultural factors, and biologic and physical environment in which the population
lives.
The alternative approach to defining nutritional adequacy of diets is based on the
biochemical and physiologic basis of human nutritional requirements in health and disease. The
quantitative definition of nutrient needs and its expression as RNIs have been important
instruments of food and nutrition policy in many countries and have focused the attention of
international bodies. This nutrient-based approach has served many purposes but has not always
fostered the establishment of nutritional and dietary priorities consistent with the broad public
health priorities at the national and international levels. It has permitted a more precise definition
of requirements for essential nutrients when establishing RNIs but unfortunately has often been
narrowly focused, concentrating on the precise nutrient requirement amount and not on solving
the nutritional problems of the world. In contrast to RNIs, FBDGs are based on the fact that
people eat food, not nutrients. As illustrated in this chapter, the notion of nutrient density is
vitamin and mineral needs
8                           Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
helpful for defining FBDGs and evaluating the adequacy of diets. In addition, they serve to
educate the public through the mass media and provide a practical guide to selecting foods by
defining dietary adequacy (1).
Advice for a healthy diet should provide both a quantitative and qualitative description
of the diet for it to be understood by individuals, who should be given information on both
size and number of servings per day. The quantitative aspects include the estimation of the
amount of nutrients in foods and their bio-availability in the form they are actually consumed.
Unfortunately, available food composition data for most foods currently consumed in the world
are incomplete, outdated, or insufficient for evaluating true bio-availability. The qualitative
aspects relate to the biologic utilisation of nutrients in the food as consumed by humans and
explore the potential for interaction among nutrients. Such an interaction may enhance or inhibit
the bio-availability of a nutrient from a given food source.
Including foods in the diet, which have high micronutrient density – such as pulses or
legumes, vegetables (including green leafy vegetables), and fruits – is the preferred way of
ensuring optimal nutrition including micronutrient adequacy for most population groups. Most
population groups afflicted by micronutrient deficiency largely subsist on refined cereal grain or
tuber-based diets, which provide energy and protein (with improper amino acid balance) but are
insufficient in critical micronutrients. Figures 2-5 and Tables 1-4 included at the end of this
chapter illustrate how addition of a variety of foods to the basic four diets (white rice- Figure 2,
corn tortilla- Figure 3, refined couscous- Figure 4, and potato- Figure 5) can increase the
nutrient density of a cereal or tuber-based diet. There is a need for broadening the food base and
diversification of diets. Much can be gained from adding reasonable amounts of these foods,
which will add micronutrient density to the staple diet (Table 1, 2, 3 and  4).
The recent interest in the role of phyto-chemicals and antioxidants on health and their
presence in plant foods lend further support to the recommendation for increasing vegetables and
fruit consumed in the diet. The need for dietary diversification is supported by the knowledge of
the interrelationships of food components, which may enhance the nutritional value of foods and
prevent undesirable imbalances, which may limit the utilisation of some nutrients. For example,
fruits rich in ascorbic acid will enhance the absorption of ionic iron.
If energy intake is low (<8.368 MJ/day), for example, in the case of young children,
sedentary women, or the elderly, the diet may not provide vitamin and mineral intakes sufficient
to meet the RNIs. This situation may be of special relevance to the elderly, who are inactive,
have decreased lean body mass, and typically decrease their energy intake. Young children,
pregnant women, and lactating women, who have greater micronutrient needs relative to their
energy needs, will also require increased micronutrient density.
The household is the basic unit for food consumption under most settings, and if there is
sufficient food, individual members of the household can consume a diet with the recommended
nutrient densities and meet their specific RNIs. However, appropriate food distribution within the
family must be considered to ensure that children and women receive adequate food with high
micronutrient density. Household food distribution must be considered when establishing general
dietary guidelines and addressing the needs of vulnerable groups in the community. In addition,
education detailing the appropriate storage and processing of foods to prevent micronutrient
losses at the household level is important.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
9
Dietary diversification when consuming cereal and tuber-based diets (rice,
corn, wheat, potato, and cassava)
Dietary diversification is important to improve the intake of critical nutrients. The
micronutrients selected discussed here, although limited in number, are of public health
relevance or serve as markers for overall micronutrient intake. The chapters on individual
nutrients will provide further details on food-related considerations for micronutrient
adequacy. The nutrients selected for discussion below include some of the nutrients, which
are most difficult to obtain in cereal and tuber-based diets. Nutrient deficiencies of vitamin A,
iron, and zinc are widespread.
Vitamin A
The vitamin A content of most staple diets can be significantly improved with the addition of
a relatively small portion of plant foods rich in carotenoids, the precursors of vitamin A. For
example, a usual portion of cooked carrots (50 g) added to a daily diet, or 21 g of carrots per
4.184 MJ, provides 500 µg retinol equivalents, which is the recommended nutrient density for
this vitamin. The biologic activity of pro-vitamin A varies among different plant sources, and
fruits and vegetables such as carrots, mango, papaya, and melon contain large amounts of
nutritionally active carotenoids, (2, 3). Green leafy vegetables such as ivy gourd have been
successfully used in Thailand as a source of vitamin A, and carotenoid-rich red palm oil
serves as an easily available and excellent source of vitamin A in other countries.
Consequently, a regular portion of these foods included in an individual’s diet may provide
100 percent or more of the daily requirement for retinol equivalents. Vitamin A is also present
in animal food sources in a highly bio-available form. Therefore it is important to consider the
possibility of meeting vitamin A needs by including animal foods in the diet. For example,
providing minor amounts of fish or chicken liver (20–25 g) in the diet provides more than the
recommended vitamin A nutrient density for virtually all age and sex groups.
Vitamin C
A real gain in vitamin C intake can be achieved by including citrus fruit or other foods rich in
ascorbic acid in the diet. For example, an orange or a small amount of other vitamin C-rich
fruit (60 g of edible portion) provides the recommended ascorbic acid density. Adding an
orange to a potato-based diet increases the level of vitamin C threefold. Other good vitamin C
food sources are guava, amla, kiwi, cranberries, strawberries, papaya, mango, melon,
cantaloupe, spinach, Swiss chard, tomato, asparagus, and Brussels sprouts. All these foods,
when added to a diet or meal in regular portion sizes, will significantly improve the vitamin C
density. Because ascorbic acid is heat labile, minimal cooking (steaming or stir-frying) is
recommended to maximise the bio-available nutrient. The significance of consuming vitamin
C with meals will be discussed relative to iron absorption (see Chapter 13).
Folate
Folate is now considered significant not only for the prevention of macrocytic anaemia, but
also for normal foetal development. Recently, this vitamin was implicated in the maintenance
of cardiovascular health and cognitive function in the elderly. Staple diets consisting largely
of cereal grains and tubers are very low in folate but can be improved by the addition of
legumes or green leafy vegetables. For example, a regular portion of cooked lentils (95 g)
added to a rice-based diet can provide an amount of folate sufficient to meet the desirable
nutrient density for this vitamin. Other legumes such as beans and peas are also good sources
of this vitamin, but larger portions are needed for folate sufficiency (100 g beans and 170 g
peas). Cluster bean and colacasia leaves are excellent folate sources used in the Indian diet.
10                           Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
Another good source of folate is chicken liver; only one portion (20–25 g) is sufficient to
meet the desirable nutrient density for folate and vitamin A simultaneously. The best sources
of folate are organ meats, green leafy vegetables, and sprouts. However, 50 percent or more of
food folate is destroyed during cooking. Prolonged heating in large volumes of water should
be avoided, and it is advisable to consume the water used in the cooking of vegetables.
Iron and zinc
Minerals such as iron and zinc are low in cereal and tuber-based diets, but the addition of
legumes can slightly improve the iron content of those diets. However, the bio-availability of
this non-heme iron source is low. Therefore, it is not possible to meet the recommended levels
of iron and zinc in the staple-based diets through a food-based approach unless some meat,
poultry, or fish is included. For example adding a small portion (50 g) of meat, poultry, or fish
will increase the total iron content as well as the amount of bio-available iron. For zinc the
presence of a small portion (50 g) of meat, poultry, or fish will secure dietary sufficiency of
most staple diets.
The consumption of ascorbic acid along with the food rich in iron will enhance
absorption. There is a critical balance between enhancers and inhibitors of iron absorption.
Nutritional status can be improved significantly by educating households on food preparation
practices, which minimise the consumption of inhibitors of iron absorption; for example, the
fermentation of phytate-containing grains before the baking of breads to enhance iron
absorption.
How to accomplish dietary diversity in practice
It is essential to work on strategies, which promote and facilitate dietary diversification to
achieve complementarity of cereal or tuber-based diets with foods rich in micronutrients in
populations with limited economics or limited access to food. A recent FAO and International
Life Sciences Institute (4) publication proposed strategies to promote dietary diversification
within the implementation of food-based approaches. These strategies, which follow, have
been adapted or modified based on the discussions held in this consultation:
1. Community or home vegetable and fruit gardens. These projects should lead to increased
production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods (legumes, green leafy vegetables,
and fruits) at the household level. The success of such projects requires a good knowledge and
understanding of local conditions as well as the involvement of women and the community in
general. These are key elements for supporting, achieving, and sustaining beneficial
nutritional change at the household level. Land availability and water supply may present
common constraints, which require local government intervention or support before they are
overcome. The educational effort should be directed towards securing appropriate within-
family distribution, which considers the needs of the most vulnerable members of the family,
especially infants and young children. Separate FBDGs for vulnerable groups, such as
pregnant and lactating women, children, and the elderly, should be developed. 
2. Production of fish, poultry, and small animals (rabbits, goats, and guinea pigs). These
are excellent sources of highly bio-available essential micronutrients such as vitamin A, iron,
and zinc. The production of animal foods at the local level may permit communities to access
foods which otherwise are not available because of their high costs. These types of projects
also need some support from local governments or non-governmental organizations to
overcome cost constraints of programme implementation, including the training of producers. 
3. Implementation of large-scale commercial vegetable and fruit production. The objective
of this initiative is to provide micronutrient-rich foods at reasonable prices through effective
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
11
and competitive markets, which lower consumer prices without reducing producer prices.
This will serve predominantly the urban and non-food-producing rural areas. 
4. Reduction of post-harvest losses of the nutritional value of micronutrient-rich foods,
such as fruits and vegetables. Improvement of storage and food-preservation facilities
significantly reduces post-harvest losses. At the household level, the promotion of effective
cooking methods and practical ways of preserving foods (solar drying of seasonal
micronutrient-rich foods such as papaya, grapes, mangoes, peaches, tomatoes, and apricots)
may significantly increase the access to bio-available micronutrient-rich foods. At the
commercial level, grading, packing, transport, and marketing practices reduce losses,
stimulate economic growth, and optimise income generation.
5. Improvement of micronutrient levels in soils and plants, which will improve the
composition of plant foods and enhance yields. Current agricultural practices can improve
the micronutrient content of foods through correcting soil quality and pH and increasing soil
mineral content depleted by erosion and poor soil conservation. Long-term food-based
solutions to micronutrient deficiencies will require improvement of agricultural practices,
seed quality, and plant breeding (by means of a classical selection process or genetic
modification).
The green revolution made important contributions to cereal supplies, and it is time to
address the need for improvements in the production of legumes, vegetables, fruits, and other
micronutrient-rich foods. FBDGs can serve to reemphasise the need for these crops.
It is well recognised that the strategies proposed to promote dietary diversity need a
strong community-level commitment. For example, the increase in price of legumes
associated with decreased production and lower demand needs to be corrected. The support of
local authorities and government may facilitate the implementation of such projects because
these actions require economic resources, which sometimes are beyond the reach of the most
needy.
Practices which will enhance the success of food-based approaches 
To achieve dietary adequacy of vitamin A, vitamin C, folate, iron, and zinc by using food-
based approaches, food preparation and dietary practices must be considered. For example, it
is important to recommend that vegetables rich in vitamin C, folate, and other water-soluble
or heat-labile vitamins be minimally cooked in small amounts of water. For iron bio-
availability it is essential to reduce the intake of inhibitors of iron absorption and to increase
the intake of enhancers of absorption in a given meal. Following this strategy, it is
recommended to increase the intake of: germinated seeds, fermented cereals, heat-processed
cereals, meats, and fruits and vegetables rich in vitamin C and to encourage the consumption
of tea, coffee, chocolate, or herbal teas at times other than with meals (see Chapter 13 and
Chapter 16). Consumption of flesh foods improves zinc absorption whereas it is inhibited by
consumption of diets high in phytate, such as diets based on unrefined cereal. Zinc availability
can be estimated according to the phytate-to-zinc (molar) ratio of the meal (5).
This advice is particularly important for people who consume cereal and tuber-based
diets. These foods constitute the main staples for most populations of the world, populations
that are also most at risk for micronutrient deficiencies. Other alternatives – fortification and
supplementation – have been proposed as stopgap measures when food-based approaches are
not feasible or are still in progress. There is a definite role for fortification in meeting iron,
folate, iodine, and zinc needs. Fortification and supplementation should be seen as
complementary to food-based strategies and not as a replacement. Combined, all these
strategies can go a long way toward stabilising the micronutrient status of populations at risk.
12                           Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
Food-based approaches usually take longer to implement but once established are truly
sustainable.
Delineating the role of supplementation and food fortification for nutrients
which cannot be supplied by regular foods 
Under ideal conditions of food access and availability, food diversity should satisfy
micronutrient and energy needs of the general population. Unfortunately, for many people in
the world, the access to a variety of micronutrient-rich foods is not possible. As demonstrated
in our analysis of cereal and tuber-based diets (see appendixes), micronutrient-rich foods
including small amount of flesh foods and a variety of plant foods (vegetables and fruits) are
needed daily. This may not be realistic at present for many communities living under
conditions of poverty. Food fortification and food supplementation are important alternatives
that complement food-based approaches to satisfy the nutritional needs of people in
developing and developed countries.
Fortification
Fortification refers to the addition of nutrients to a commonly eaten food (the vehicle). It is
possible for a single nutrient or group of micronutrients (the fortificant) to be added to the
vehicle, which has been identified through a process in which all stakeholders have
participated. This strategy is accepted as sustainable under most conditions and often is cost
effective on a large scale when successfully implemented. Iron fortification of wheat flour and
iodine fortification of salt is examples of fortification strategies with excellent results (6).
There are at least three essential conditions that must be met in any fortification
programme(6, 7): the fortificant should be effective, bio-available, acceptable, and affordable;
the selected food vehicle should be easily accessible and a specified amount of it should be
regularly consumed in the local diet; and detailed production instructions and monitoring
procedures should be in place and enforced by law.
Iron fortification
Food fortification with iron is recommended when dietary iron is insufficient or the dietary
iron is of poor bio-availability, which is the reality for most people in the developing world
and for vulnerable population groups in the developed world. Moreover, the prevalence of
iron deficiency and anaemia in vegetarians and in populations of the developing world which
rely on cereal or tuber foods is significantly higher than in omnivore populations.
Iron is present in foods in two forms, as heme iron, which is derived from flesh foods
(meats, poultry, and fish), and as non-heme iron, which is the inorganic form present in plant
foods such as legumes, grains, nuts, and vegetables (8, 9). Heme iron is highly (20–30
percent) absorbed and its bio-availability is relatively unaffected by dietary factors. Non-heme
iron has a lower rate of absorption (2–10 percent), depending on the balance between iron
absorption inhibitors (phytates, polyphenols, calcium, and phosphate) and iron absorption
enhancers (ascorbic and citric acids, cysteine-containing peptides, ethanol, and fermentation
products) present in the diet (8, 9). Because staple foods around the world provide
predominantly non-heme iron sources of low bio-availability, the traditionally eaten staple
foods represent an excellent vehicle for iron fortification. Examples of foods, which have
been fortified, are wheat flour, corn (maize) flour, rice, salt, sugar, cookies, curry powder, fish
sauce, and soy sauce (8). Nevertheless the beneficial effects of consumption of iron
absorption enhancers have been extensively proven and should always be promoted (i.e.,
consumption of vitamin C–rich food together with the non-heme iron source).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
13
Iodine fortification
Iodine is sparsely distributed in the Earth’s surface and foods grown in soils with little or no
iodine lack an adequate amount of this micronutrient. This situation had made iodine
deficiency disorders exceedingly common in most of the world and highly prevalent in many
countries before the introduction of salt iodisation (10). Only foods of marine origin are
naturally rich sources of iodine. Salt is a common food used by most people worldwide, and
the establishment of an well-implemented permanent salt-iodisation programme has been
proven to eradicate iodine deficiency disorders (see Chapter 12). Universal salt iodisation is
the best way to virtually eliminate iodine deficiency disorders by the year 2000 (4).
However, salt iodisation is not simply a matter of legislating mandatory iodisation of
salt. It is important to determine the best fortification technique, co-ordinate the
implementation at all salt production sites, establish effective monitoring and quality control
programmes, and measure iodine fortification level periodically. The difficulties in
implementing salt iodisation programmes arise primarily when the salt industry is widely
dispersed among many small producers. The level of iodine fortification usually lies between
25 and 50 mg/kg salt. The actual amount should be specified according to the level of salt
intake and magnitude of deficit at the country level, because iodine must be added within safe
and effective ranges. Additionally, it is very important to implement a monitoring plan to
control the amount of iodine in the salt at the consumer’s table, (10, 11). United Nations
agencies responsible for assisting governments in establishing iodisation programmes should
provide technical support for programme implementation, monitoring, and evaluation to
ensure sustainability.
Zinc fortification
The body depends on a regular zinc supply provided by the daily diet because stores are quite
limited. Food diversity analysis demonstrates that it is virtually impossible to achieve zinc
adequacy in the absence of a flesh food source. Among flesh foods, beef is the best source of
zinc and is followed by poultry and then fish. Zinc fortification programmes are being
studied, especially for populations, which consume predominately plant foods. Fortification
of cereal staple foods is a potentially attractive intervention, which could benefit the whole
population as well as target the vulnerable population groups of children and pregnant
women. Such addition of zinc to the diet would perhaps decrease the prevalence of stunting in
many developing countries with low-zinc diets, because linear growth is affected by zinc
supply.
Folic acid fortification
The recommended nutrient density by the developers of the FAO/WHO (1) FBDGs for folic
acid is 200 µg/4.184 MJ. Although this reference value is higher than other standards of
reference, the increase in folic acid consumption by women of childbearing age is very
important: it may improve birth weight and reduce the prevalence of neural tube defects by 50
percent. Elevated plasma homo-cysteine levels are considered to be an independent risk factor
for heart disease; a higher intake of folic acid may also benefit the rest of the population
because it may lower homo-cysteine levels in adults (see Chapter 4). In addition, folate may
improve the mental condition of the elderly population (12, 13).
Although the desirable folic acid density may be achieved through dietary diversity, it
requires the daily presence of organ meats, green leafy vegetables, pulses, legumes, or nuts in
the diet (14). Most population groups may not easily reach the appropriate level of folic acid
consumption; therefore, folic acid fortification has been recommended. The United States
initiated mandatory folic acid fortification of cereal-grain products in January 1998. The
14                           Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
fortification level approved in the United States is 140 µg/100 g product, which will increase
the average woman’s intake by only 100 µg/day. This amount is considered safe (a dose,
which will not mask pernicious anaemia, which results from vitamin B12 deficiency,) but it
may be ineffective in lowering the occurrence of neural tube defects (15).
Supplementation
Supplementation refers to periodic administration of pharmacologic preparations of nutrients
as capsules or tablets or by injection when substantial or immediate benefits are necessary for
the group at risk. As established at the International Conference on Nutrition (16), nutritional
supplementation should be restricted to vulnerable groups, which cannot meet their nutrient
needs through food (women of childbearing age, infants and young children, elderly people,
low socio-economic groups, displaced people, refugees, and populations experiencing other
emergency situations). For example, iron supplementation is recognised as the only option to
control or prevent iron deficiency anaemia in pregnant women. Supplementation with folic
acid should be considered for women of childbearing age who have had a child with neural
tube defect to prevent recurrence.
Food-based dietary guidelines 
Food-based dietary guidelines (FBDGs) are an instrument of and expression of food and
nutrition policy and should be based directly on diet and disease relationships of particular
relevance to the individual country. Their primary purpose is to educate healthcare
professionals and consumers about health promotion and disease prevention. In this way
priorities in establishing dietary guidelines can address the relevant public health concerns
whether they are related to dietary insufficiency or excess. In this context, meeting the
nutritional needs of the population takes its place as one of the components of food and
nutrition policy goals along with the priorities included in the FBDGs for improved health and
nutrition for a given population.
The world nutrition and health situation demonstrates that the major causes of death and
disability have been traditionally related to undernutrition in developing countries and to the
imbalance between energy intake and expenditure (which lead to obesity and other chronic
diseases – diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and stroke) in industrialized countries.
The tragedy is that many suffer from too little food while others have diseases resulting from
too much food, but both would benefit from a more balanced distribution of food and other
resources. Although the nature of the health and nutrition problems in these two contrasting
groups is very different, the dietary guidelines required to improve both situations are not. Most
countries presently have the combined burden of malnutrition from deficit and increasing
prevalence of obesity and other chronic diseases from over consumption. The approaches to
address the problems, nevertheless, should be country and population specific.
Although two-thirds of the world’s population depends on cereal or tuber-based diets, the
other one-third consumes significant amounts of animal food products. The latter group places an
undue demand on land, water, and other resources required for intensive food production, which
makes the typical Western diet not only undesirable from the standpoint of health but also
environmentally unsustainable. If we balance energy intake with the expenditure required for
basal metabolism, physical activity, growth, and repair, we will find that the dietary quality
required for health is essentially the same across population groups.
Efforts in nutrition education and health promotion should include a strong
encouragement for active lifestyles. Improving energy balance for rural populations in
developing countries may mean increasing energy intake to normalise low body mass index
(BMI, weight/height2, calculated as kg/m2), ensuring adequate energy stores and energy for
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
15
appropriate social interactions. In sedentary urban populations, improving energy balance will
mean increasing physical activity to decrease energy stores (body fat mass) and thus normalise
BMI. Thus, the apparent conflicting goals – eradicating undernutrition while preventing
overnutrition – are resolved by promoting sufficient energy for a normal BMI. Moreover, if we
accept that FBDGs should be ecologically sustainable, the types and amounts of foods included
in a balanced diet are not very different for promoting adequate nutrition in the undernourished
and preventing overnutrition in the affluent.
This is well exemplified by the similarities in the FBDGs across countries, whether
represented by pyramids, rainbows, dishes, pots, etc. It is obvious that consumption of excess
energy will induce an increase in energy stores, which may lead to obesity and related health
complications. Populations should consume nutritionally adequate and varied diets, based
primarily on foods of plant origin with small amounts of added flesh foods. Households should
select predominantly plant-based diets rich in a variety of vegetables and fruits, pulses or
legumes, and minimally processed starchy staple foods. The evidence that such diets will
prevent or delay a significant proportion of non-communicable chronic diseases is consistent.
A predominantly plant-based diet has a low energy density, which may protect against
obesity. This should not exclude small amounts of animal foods, which may make an
important nutritional contribution to plant-food-based diets, as illustrated in the examples
presented earlier. Inadequate diets occur when food is scarce or when food traditions change
rapidly, as is seen in societies undergoing demographic transitions or rapid urbanisation.
Traditional diets, when adequate and varied, are likely to be generally healthful and more
protective against chronic non-communicable diseases than the typical Western diet,
consumed predominantly in industrialized societies (17).
Reorienting food production, agricultural research, and commercialisation policies
needs to take into consideration FBDGs, which increase the demand for a variety of
micronutrient-rich foods and thus stimulate production to meet the consumption needs.
Prevailing agricultural policies encourage research on and production and importation of
foods, which do not necessarily meet the requirements of FBDG implementation. For
example, great emphasis is placed on cereals, horticultural crops for export, legumes for
export, non-food cash crops, and large livestock. Necessary policy reorientation is required to
ensure increased availability of micronutrient-rich foods within the local food system.
Norway has successfully implemented agricultural and food production policies based on a
National Nutrition Plan of Action, providing economic incentives for the producer and
consumer in support of healthful diets. The results speak for themselves, as Norway has
experienced a sustained improvement in life expectancy and a reduction in deaths from
cardiovascular disease and other chronic non-communicable conditions.
Recommendations for the future
The Consultation acknowledged the limitations in our knowledge of these important aspects,
which affect nutrient utilisation and recommended that the International Food Data System
(INFoods) effort led by FAO/UNU be strengthened. Special emphasis should be placed on the
micronutrient composition of local diets as affected by ecologic setting; analysis of food
components (nutrients or bio-active components), which may affect the bio-availability and
utilisation of critical micronutrients; and the analysis of cooked foods and typical food
combinations as actually consumed by population groups. In addition the development of
FBDGs at the country level should be supported by UN agencies.
16                           Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
Future research 
The following research needs were identified to facilitate the implementation of a food-based
approach in the prevention of micronutrient deficiencies:
 food data system development, which includes development of methodology for
micronutrient composition of foods, organizing data retrieval, and reporting and
dissemination through electronic means; this effort should include phyto-chemicals,
antioxidants, and other components which may affect health and nutrition, with special
emphasis on local foods which may be important for given food cultures; 
 identification and evaluation of optimal methods for cooking foods to preserve the
nutrient value and enhance the bio-availability of micronutrients;
 development of better methods to preserve foods, especially micronutrients, at the
household and community levels; 
 identification and propagation of agricultural methods which will enhance the food yields,
content, and biologic value of micronutrient-rich foods; 
 identification of optimal food combinations and serving size which will be most effective
in preventing micronutrient deficits and methods of promotion for these food
combinations at the community level;
 development of agricultural research to support the implementation of FBDGs; and 
 evaluation of the nutritional impact and cost benefit of food-based approaches in
combating micronutrient deficiencies.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
17
Figure 2
Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet of white rice
and the addition of a variety of foods
%  RND

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Fig. 2b. White rice + carrots
% RND










Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Fig. 2d. White rice + carrots,
orange & lentils




% RND












Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 2f. White rice + carrots,

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
orange, beef & spinach







% RND












Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Note: Data in Tables 1 and  3
Figure 2a. White rice based diet
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20




0
Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
180
Fig 2c. White rice + carrots,

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
& orange
% RND















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Fig. 2e. White rice + carrots,
orange & beef


% RND











Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 2g. White rice + carrots,  orange,

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
beef, spinach &  lentils









% RND



















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn



















18                            Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
Figure 3
Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet of corn-tortilla
and the addition of a variety of foods
180
160
140
120
100
%  RND
180
180
Fig. 3b. Corn-tortilla + carrots
Fig. 3c. Corn-tortilla +

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160

% RND






Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Fig. 3d. Corn-tortilla  + carrots,
orange & lentils



% RND










Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 3f. Corn-tortilla + carrots,
orange, beef & spinach

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180





% RND












Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Note: Data in Tables 1 and 3
Figure 3a. Corn-tortilla based diet
80
60
40


20







0


Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
carrots & orange


% RND


















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Fig. 3e. Corn-tortilla +
carrots, orange & beef

% RND
% RND























Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 3g. Corn-tortilla + carrots,
orange, beef, spinach & black beans
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180


































0

Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn









































FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
19
Figure 4
Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet of refined
couscous and the addition of a variety of foods
180
160
140
120
%  RND
100
80
60
40
20

0

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Fig. 4b. Refined couscous +
carrots
% RND







Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 4d. Refined couscous +
carrots, orange & lentils
% RND


Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 4f. Refined couscous +
carrots, orange, beef & spinach




% RND
Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Note: Data in Tables 2 and 4
Figure 4a. Refined couscous based diet







Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 4c. Refined couscous +
% RND








Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 4e. Refined couscous +
carrots, orange & beef
% RND
% RND






Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 4g. Refined couscous + carrots,
orange, beef, spinach & black beans

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180













Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
carrots & orange




















20                            Chapter 2:  Food-based approaches to meeting vitamin and mineral needs
Figure 5
Percentage of recommended nutrient density  (RND) for a diet of potatoes and
%  RND
Fig. 5b. Potato + carrots
Fig. 5c. Potato +
 carrots & orange
100
120
140
220
240



% RND
% RND





0
20
40
60
80










Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 5d. Potato + carrots,
orange & lentils

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
300
320




















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 5f. Potato + carrots,
orange, beef & spinach
320
340
300
320





0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160


% RND

















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Note: Data in Tables 2 and 4
the addition of a variety of foods
Figure 5a. Potato  based diet
240

220

140


120

100

80


60

40


20






0


Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
320
340



% RND
% RND











Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 5e. Potato +
carrots, orange & beef

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
280
300


















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn
Fig. 5g. Potato + carrots,
orange, beef, spinach & lentils



0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160




% RND



















Vit A
Vit C
Folate
Fe
Zn



































Table 1:  White rice and corn-tortilla based diets composition and  nutrient density values per 1000 kcals  for vitamin A, vitamin C,
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach  raw 50 g
White rice 428 g
% E as Protein
5
6
6
8
11
12
13
% E as CHO
72
72
72
69
61
60
59
% E as Fat
23
22
22
23
28
28
28
Vitamin A (µg)
0
516
528
529
528
864
864
Vitamin C (mg)
0
0.5
32.5
33.9
32.5
46.5
47.0
Folate  (µg)
12
15
32
203
35
131
212
Iron (mg)
1.2
1.3
1.3
4.3
2.8
4.1
5.6
Zinc (mg)
2.4
2.5
2.4
3.2
5.8
6.0
6.4
Calcium (mg)
18.0
24.2
47.7
62.8
49.4
98.6
105.8
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 45 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach  raw 50 g
White rice 468 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 477 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
WHITE RICE BASED DIET
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 483 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 95g
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 570 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 590g
Carrots 21 g
White rice 598 g
folate, iron and zinc
Corn-tortilla 266 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Black beans 45 g
% E as Protein
8
8
8
10
13
14
15
% E as CHO
67
67
67
66
58
57
57
% E as Fat
25
25
25
24
29
29
28
Vitamin A (µg)
0
516
528
529
528
864
864
Vitamin C (mg)
0
0.5
32.5
33.5
32.5
46.5
46.5
Folate  (µg)
59
61
77
200
73
169
232
Iron (mg)
5.2
5.2
5.1
6.9
6.0
7.3
7.9
Zinc (mg)
3.4
3.4
3.3
3.9
6.6
6.8
7.0
Calcium (mg)
647.7
645.4
648.3
596.5
557.8
598.5
565.0
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Corn-tortilla 292g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Corn-tortilla 297 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
CORN-TORTILLA BASED DIET
Corn-tortilla 314 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 71 g
Corn-tortilla 351 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Corn-tortilla 363 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Carrots 21 g
Corn-tortilla 368 g
Ref. Couscous 493 g
Table 2: Refined Couscous and potato based diets composition and nutrient density values per 1000 kcal for vitamin  A, vitamin C, folate,
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Black beans 45 g
% E as Protein
11
11
10
12
15
16
17
% E as CHO
66
66
66
64
56
55
55
% E as Fat
23
23
24
24
29
29
28
Vitamin A (µg)
0
516
528
529
528
864
864
Vitamin C (mg)
0
0.5
32.5
33.5
32.5
46.5
46.5
Folate  (µg)
105
107
121
236
109
204
263
Iron (mg)
2.6
2.8
2.7
4.7
3.9
5.3
6.0
Zinc (mg)
1.8
1.9
1.8
2.5
5.3
5.5
5.9
Calcium (mg)
55.7
61.6
83.7
90.8
79.4
128.2
136.2
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Beef 55 g
Ref. Couscous 546g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Beef 55 g
Ref. Couscous 555 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
REFINED COUSCOUS BASED DIET
Beef 55 g
Ref. Couscous 590 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Lentils70 g
Ref. Couscous 665g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Ref. Couscous 690 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Ref. Couscous 697 g
iron and zinc
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
% E as Protein
6
6
6
8
12
12
13
% E as CHO
71
71
71
69
61
60
59
% E as Fat
23
23
23
23
27
28
28
Vitamin A (µg)
0
516
528
529
528
864
864
Vitamin C (mg)
67.2
67.0
96.5
90.5
86.0
99.1
95.2
Folate  (µg)
80
82
97
216
89
185
261
Iron (mg)
2.8
2.9
2.9
4.9
4.1
5.4
6.7
Zinc (mg)
2.5
2.5
2.5
3.1
5.8
6.0
6.4
Calcium (mg)
67.2
72.8
94.6
100.7
88.7
137.1
141.0
Potato 649 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 45 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Potato 710 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 723 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
POTATO BASED DIET
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 770 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 70 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 865 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 895 g
Carrots 21 g
Potato 907 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
White rice 428 g
% E as Protein
5 
6 
6 
8 
11 
12 
13 
% E as CHO
72 
72 
72 
69 
61 
60 
59 
% E as Fat
23 
22 
22 
23 
28 
28 
28 
Vitamin A (µg)
0 
103 - 147 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
173 - 247 
173 - 247 
Vitamin C (mg)
0 
2 
108 
113 
108 
155 
157 
Folate  
6 - 8 
8 - 10 
16 - 21 
102 - 135 
18 - 23 
66 - 87 
106 - 141 
Iron
6 
7 
7 
22 
51 
75 
102 
Zinc 
24 
25 
24 
32 
97 
100 
107 
Calcium
5 - 7 
6 - 10 
12 - 19 
16 - 25 
12 - 20 
25 - 39 
26 - 42
Table 3: White rice and corn-tortilla  based diets composition and percent of nutrient density values for vitamin A, vitamin C,
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 45 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
White rice 468 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 477 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
WHITE RICE BASED DIET
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 483 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 95g
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 570 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
White rice 590g
Carrots 21 g
White rice 598 g
folate, iron and zinc
Corn-tortilla 266 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Black beans 45 g
% E as Protein
8 
8 
8 
10 
13 
14 
15 
% E as CHO
67 
67 
67 
66 
58 
57 
57 
% E as Fat
25 
25 
25 
24 
29 
29 
28 
Vitamin A (µg) 
0 
103 - 147 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
173 - 247 
173 - 247
Vitamin C (mg)
0 
2 
108 
112 
108 
155 
155 
Folate  
30 - 39 
31 - 41 
39 - 51 
100 - 133 
37 - 49 
85 - 113 
116 - 155 
Iron 
26 
26 
26 
35 
109 
133 
144 
Zinc 
34 
34 
33 
39 
110 
113 
117 
Calcium
162 - 259 
161 - 258 
162 - 259 
149 - 239 
139 - 223 
150 - 239 
141 - 226
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Corn-tortilla 292 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Corn-tortilla 297 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
CORN-TORTILLA BASED DIET
Corn-tortilla 314 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 71 g
Corn-tortilla 351 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Corn-tortilla 363 g
Vegetable oil 20 g
Carrots 21 g
Corn-tortilla 368 g
Table 4: Refined couscous and potato based diets composition and percent of nutrient density values for vitamin. A, vitamin C,
Ref. Couscous 492g
Vegetable oil 25 g
% E as Protein
11 
11 
10 
12 
15 
16 
17 
% E as CHO
66 
66 
66 
64 
56 
55 
55 
% E as Fat
23 
23 
24 
24 
29 
29 
28 
Vitamin A (µg) 
0 
103 - 147 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
173 - 247 
173 - 247
Vitamin C (mg)
0 
2 
108 
112 
108 
155 
155 
Folate  
53 - 70 
54 - 71 
61 - 81 
118 - 157 
55 - 73 
102 - 136 
132 - 175 
Iron
13 
14 
14 
24 
71 
96 
109 
Zinc
18 
19 
18 
25 
88 
92 
98 
Calcium
14 - 22 
15 - 25 
21 - 33 
23 - 36 
20 - 32 
32 - 51 
34 - 54
Spinach raw 50 g
Black beans 45 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Beef 55 g
Ref. Couscous 546 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach raw 50 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Beef 55 g
Ref. Couscous 555 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
REFINED COUSCOUS BASED DIET
Beef 55 g
Ref. Couscous 590 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Lentils70 g
Ref. Couscous 665g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Orange 60 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Ref. Couscous 690 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Carrots 21 g
Ref. Couscous 697 g
folate, iron and zinc
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach  raw 50 g
% E as Protein
6 
6 
6 
8 
12 
12 
13 
 % E as CHO
71 
71 
71 
69 
61 
60 
59 
% E as Fat
23 
23 
23 
23 
27 
28 
28 
Vitamin A (µg)
0 
103 - 147 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
106 - 151 
173 - 247 
173 - 247 
Vitamin C (mg)
224 
223 
322 
302 
287 
330 
317 
Folate  
40 - 53 
41 - 55 
49 - 65 
108 - 144 
45 - 59 
93 - 123 
131 - 174 
Iron
14 
15 
15 
25 
75 
98 
122 
Zinc 
25 
25 
25 
31 
97 
100 
107 
Calcium
17 - 27 
18 - 29 
24 - 38 
25 - 40 
22 - 35 
34 - 55 
35 - 56
Potato 649 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 45 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Spinach  raw 50 g
Potato 710 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 725 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Beef 55 g
POTATO BASED DIET
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 770 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Lentils 70 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 865 g
Orange 60 g
Carrots 21 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Vegetable oil 25 g
Potato 895 g
Carrots 21 g
Potato 907 g
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
25
1. WHO/FAO. 1996.  Preparation and Use of Food-Based Dietary Guidelines. Report of a joint
FAO/WHO consultation, Nicosia, Cyprus 1996. Nutrition Program, World Health
Organization, Geneva. WHO/NUT/96.6.
2. FAO/WHO. 1988. Requirements of Vitamin A, Iron, Folate and Vitamin B12, Report of a
joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. (Food and Nutrition Series, No. 23), FAO, Rome.
3. Olson, J.A. 1994.  Needs and Sources of Carotenoids and Vitamin A, Nutr. Revs., 52(2II)
S67-S73.
4. FAO/ILSI. 1997. Preventing Micronutrient Malnutrition: A Guide to Food-Based
Approaches, ILSI Press, Washington DC.
5. WHO. Trace Elements in Human Nutrition. 1996 a., World Health Organization, Geneva.
6. Lotfi, M., Venkatesh-Mannar, M.G., Merx, R.J.H.M. & P.Naber-van den Heuvel. 1996.
Micronutrient Fortification of Foods. Current practices, research, and opportunities. Ottawa.
The Micronutrient Initiative (MI), International Development Research Center (IDRC)/
International Agricultural Center (IAC). 
7. Viteri, F.E. Prevention of Iron Deficiency. 1998. Chapter 3 In : Howson CP, Kennedy ET,
Horwitz A (eds). Prevention of Micronutrient Deficiencies. Tools for Policymakers and
Public Health Workers. p.45-102. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 
8. Hallberg, L., Hulthén, L. & Gramatkovski, E. 1997. Iron absorption from the whole diet in
men: how effective is the regulation of iron absorption? Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66:347-56.
9. Allen, L.H. & Ahluwalia, N. 1997. Improving Iron Status Through Diet. The Application of
Knowledge Concerning Dietary Iron Bio-availability in Human Populations. Arlington,  John
Snow, Inc.  Opportunities for Micronutrient Interventions Project. 
10. Stanbury, J.B. 1998. Prevention of Iodine Deficiency. Chapter 5 In: Howson CP, Kennedy
ET, Horwitz A (eds). Prevention of Micronutrient Deficiencies. Tools for Policymakers and
Public Health Workers. p.167-202. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press. 
11. Unicef, ICCDD, PAMM, MNI, WHO. 1995. Monitoring Universal Salt Iodisation
Programmes. Sullivan, K.M., Houston, R., Gorstein, J., and J. Cervinskas, eds. Geneva.
12. Tucker, K.L., Mahnken, B., Wilson, P.W.F., Jacques, P. & J. Selhub. 1996. Folic Acid
Fortification of the Food Supply. Potential Benefits and Risk for the Elderly Population.
JAMA. 2776:1879-85.
13. Oakley, G.P., Adams, M.J. & Dickinson, Ch.M. 1996. More Folic Acid for Everyone,
Now. Z   J. Nutr., 126:751S-755S.
14. Bower, C. 1995. Folate and Neural Tube Defects.  Nutr. Revs., 53 (9)II: S33-S38.
15. Daly, S., Mills, J.L., Molloy, A.M., Conley, M. Lee, Y.J., Kirke, P.N., Weir, D.G. & J.M.
Scott. 1997. Minimum effective dose of folic acid for food fortification to prevent neural-tube
defects. Lancet, 350:1666-69.
16. FAO/WHO. 1992. International Conference on Nutrition. World Declaration and Plan of
Action for Nutrition. FAO, Rome. 
17. WHO. 1990. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a WHO Study
Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 797).
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
27
Chapter 3
Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6,
T
he B-complex vitamins covered here are presented in Table 5 along with the
biochemical and physiologic roles of the co-enzyme forms and a brief description of
clinical deficiency symptoms.
Table 5
Physiologic roles and deficiency signs of B-complex vitamins
Vitamin
Physiologic roles
Deficiency
Thiamin (B1)
Riboflavin (B2)
Niacin (nicotinic acid and
nicotinamide)
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine,
pyridoxamine, and
pyridoxal)
Pantothenic acid
Biotin
Rice and wheat are the staples for many populations of the world. Excessive refining
and polishing of cereals removes considerable proportions of B vitamins contained in these
cereals. Clinical manifestations of deficiency of some B vitamins – such as beri-beri (cardiac
and dry), peripheral neuropathies, pellagra, and oral and genital lesions (related to riboflavin
deficiency) – were once major public health problems in parts of the world. These
manifestations have now declined, the decline being brought about not through programmes,
pantothenic acid and biotin
Co-enzyme functions in
metabolism of carbohydrates and
branched-chain amino acids
Beri-beri, polyneuritis, and
Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome
Co-enzyme functions in numerous
oxidation and reduction reactions
Growth, cheilosis, angular
stomatitis, and dermatitis
Co-substrate/co-enzyme for
hydrogen transfer with numerous
dehydrogenases
Pellagra with diarrhoea,
dermatitis, and dementia
Co-enzyme functions in
metabolism of amino acids,
glycogen, and sphingoid bases
Naso-lateral seborrhoea,
glossitis, and peripheral
neuropathy (epileptiform
convulsions in infants)
Constituent of co-enzyme A and
phosphopantetheine involved in
fatty acid metabolism
Fatigue, sleep disturbances,
impaired coordination, and
nausea
Co-enzyme functions in
bicarbonate-dependent
carboxylations
Fatigue, depression, nausea,
dermatitis, and muscular
pains
28                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
which distribute synthetic vitamins but through changes in the patterns of food availability
and consequent changes in dietary practices of the populations.
Although these clinical manifestations of B-vitamin deficiencies have decreased, there
is evidence of widespread sub-clinical deficiency of these vitamins (especially of riboflavin
and pyridoxine). These sub-clinical deficiencies, although less dramatic in their
manifestations, exert deleterious metabolic effects. Despite the progress in reduction of
large-scale deficiency in the world, there are periodic reports of outbreaks of B-complex
deficiencies, which are linked to deficits of B vitamins in populations under various distress
conditions.
Refugee and displaced population groups (20 million people by current United
Nations estimates) are at risk for B-complex deficiency because most cereal foods used under
emergency situations are not fortified with micronutrients (1). Recent reports have implicated
the low B-complex content of diets as a factor in the outbreak of peripheral neuropathy and
visual loss observed the adult population of Cuba (2-4). This deficiency in Cuba resulted from
the consequences of an economic blockade (4).
Because of the extensive literature pertaining to the study of the B-complex vitamins,
the references cited here were selected from those published after the FAO/WHO handbook
on human nutritional requirements was published in 1974 (5). Greater weight has been given
to studies which used larger numbers of subjects over longer periods, more thoroughly
assessed dietary intake, varied the level of the specific vitamin being investigated, and used
multiple indicators, including those considered functional in the assessment of status. These
indicators have been the main basis for ascertaining requirements. Although extensive, the
bibliographic search of recently published reports presented in this chapter most likely
underestimates the extent of B-complex deficiency considering that many cases are not
reported in the medical literature. Moreover, outbreaks of vitamin deficiencies in populations
are usually not publicised because governments may consider the existence of these
conditions to be politically sensitive information. Additional references are listed in the
publication by the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine of the US National
Academy of Sciences (6).
Thiamin
Background with requisite function in human metabolic processes 
Deficiency
Thiamin (vitamin B1, aneurin) deficiency results in the disease called beri-beri, which has
been classically considered to exist in dry (paralytic) and wet (oedematous) forms (7, 8). Beri-
beri occurs in human-milk-fed infants whose nursing mothers are deficient. It also occurs in
adults with high carbohydrate intakes mainly from milled rice and with intakes of anti-
thiamin factors. Beri-beri is still endemic in Asia. In relatively industrialized nations, the
neurologic reflections of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome are frequently associated with
chronic alcoholism with limited food consumption (9). Some cases of thiamin deficiency have
been observed with patients who are hypermetabolic, are on parenteral nutrition, are
undergoing chronic renal dialysis, or have undergone a gastrectomy. Thiamin deficiency has
also been observed in Nigerians who ate silk worms, Russian schoolchildren (in Moscow),
Thai rural elderly, Cubans, Japanese elderly, Brazilian Xavante Indians, French Guyanense,
Southeast Asian schoolchildren who were infected with hookworm, Malaysian detention
inmates, and people with chronic alcoholism.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
29
Toxicity
Toxicity is not a problem with thiamin because renal clearance of levels conceivably ingested
is rapid.
Functions
Thiamin functions as the co-enzyme thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) in the metabolism of
carbohydrates and branched-chain amino acids. Specifically the Mg2+-coordinated TPP
participates in the formation of α-ketols (e.g., among hexose and pentose phosphates) as
catalysed by transketolase and in the oxidation of α-keto acids (e.g., pyruvate, α-
ketoglutarate, and branched-chain α-keto acids) by dehydrogenase complexes (10, 11).
Hence, when there is insufficient thiamin, the overall decrease in carbohydrate metabolism
and its inter-connection with amino acid metabolism (via α-keto acids) have severe
consequences, such as a decrease in the formation of acetylcholine for neural function.
Biochemical indicators
Indicators used to estimate thiamin requirements are urinary excretion, erythrocyte
transketolase activity coefficient, erythrocyte thiamin, blood pyruvate and lactate, and
neurologic changes. The excretion rate of the vitamin and its metabolites reflects intake, and
the validity of the assessment of thiamin nutriture is improved with load test. Erythrocyte
transketolase activity co-efficient reflects TPP levels and can indicate rare genetic defects.
Erythrocyte thiamin is mainly a direct measure of TPP but also is a measure of thiamin and
thiamin monophosphate by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation.
Thiamin status has been assessed by measuring urinary thiamin excretion under basal
conditions or after thiamin loading, transketolase activity, and free and phosphorylated forms
in blood or serum (6, 9). Although overlap with baseline values for urinary thiamin was found
with oral doses below 1 mg, a correlation of 0.86 between oral and excreted amounts was
found by Bayliss et al. (12). The erythrocyte transketolase assay, in which an activity
coefficient based on a TPP stimulation of the basal level is given, continues to be a main
functional indicator (9), but some problems have been encountered. Gans and Harper (13)
found a wide range of TPP effect when thiamin intakes were adequate above 1.5 mg/day over
a 3-day period. In some cases the activity coefficient may appear normal after prolonged
deficiency (14). This measure seemed poorly correlated with dietary intakes estimated for a
group of English adolescents (15). Certainly, there are both inter-individual and genetic
factors affecting the transketolase (16). Baines and Davies (17) suggested that it is useful to
determine erythrocyte TPP directly because the co-enzyme is less susceptible to factors that
influence enzyme activity; however, there are also methods for determining thiamin and its
phosphate esters in whole blood (18).
Factors affecting requirements
Because thiamin facilitates energy utilisation, its requirements have traditionally been
expressed on the basis of energy intake, which can vary depending on activity levels.
However, Fogeholm et al. (19) found no difference in activation coefficients for erythrocyte
transketolase from a small group of skiers and from less physically active control subjects.
Also, a study with thiamin-restricted Dutch males whose intake averaged 0.43 mg/day for 11
weeks did not reveal an association between short bouts of intense exercise and the decreases
in indicators of thiamin status (20). Alcohol consumption may interfere with thiamin
absorption (9).
30                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
Findings by age and life stage
Recommendations for infants are based on adequate food intake. Mean thiamin content of
human milk is 0.21 mg/l (0.62 µmol/l) (21), which corresponds to 0.16 mg (0.49µmol)
thiamin per 0.75 l of secreted milk per day. The blood concentration for total thiamin averages
210 ± 53 nmol/l for infants up to 6 months but decreases over the first 12–18 months of life
(22).
A study of 13–14-year-old children related dietary intake of thiamin to several
indicators of thiamin status (15). Sauberlich et al. (23) concluded from a carefully controlled
depletion-repletion study of seven healthy young men that 0.3 mg thiamin per 4184 kJ met
their requirements. Intakes below this amount lead to irritability and other symptoms and
signs of deficiency (24). Anderson et al. (25) reported thiamin intakes of 1.0 and 1.2 mg/day
as minimal for women and men, respectively. Hoorn et al. (26) reported that 23 percent of 153
patients aged 65–93 years were deemed deficient based on a transketolase activation
coefficient greater than 1.27, which was normalised after thiamin administration. Nichols and
Basu (27) found that only 57 percent of 60 adults aged 65–74 years had TPP effects of less
than 14 percent and suggested that ageing may increase thiamin requirements.
An average total energy cost of 230 MJ has been estimated for pregnancy (28). With
an intake of 0.4 mg thiamin/4184 kJ, this amounts to 22 mg total, or 0.12 mg/day for an
additional thiamin need for the second and third trimesters (180 days). Taking into account an
increased growth in maternal and foetal compartments, an overall additional requirement of
0.3 mg/day is adequate (6).
Lactating women are estimated to transfer 0.2 mg thiamin in their milk each day, and
an additional 0.2 mg is estimated as a need for the increased energy cost of lactation of about
2092 kJ/day.
Recommendations 
The recommendations for thiamin are given in Table 6.
Table 6
Recommended nutrient intakes for thiamin
Group
mg/day
Infants and children
   0–6 months
0.2
   7–12 months
0.3
   1–3 years
0.5
   4–6 years
0.6
   7–9 years 
0.9
Adolescents, 10–18 years
   Females
   Males
1.1
1.2
Adults 
   Females, 19+ years 
1.1
   Males, 19+ years
1.2
Pregnancy
1.4
Lactation
1.5
Recommended nutrient intake
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
31
Riboflavin
Background with requisite function in human metabolic processes 
Deficiency
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) deficiency results in the condition of hypo- or ariboflavinosis, with
sore throat; hyperaemia; oedema of the pharyngeal and oral mucous membranes; cheilosis;
angular stomatitis; glossitis; seborrheic dermatitis; and normochromic, normocytic bone
marrow (8, 29). Because the deficiency almost invariably occurs combined with a deficiency
of other B-complex vitamins, some of the symptoms (e.g., glossitis and dermatitis) may result
from other complicating deficiencies. The major cause of hypo-riboflavinosis is inadequate
dietary intake as a result of limited food supply, which is sometimes exacerbated by poor food
storage or processing. Children in developing countries will commonly demonstrate clinical
signs of riboflavin deficiency during periods of the year when gastrointestinal infections are
prevalent. Decreased assimilation of riboflavin also results from abnormal digestion such as
that which occurs with lactose intolerance. This condition is highest in African and Asian
populations and can lead to a decreased intake of milk as well as an abnormal absorption of the
vitamin. Absorption of riboflavin is also affected in some other conditions, for example,
tropical sprue, celiac disease, malignancy and resection of the small bowel, and decreased
gastrointestinal passage time. In relatively rare cases the causes of deficiency are inborn errors
in which the genetic defect is in the formation of a flavoprotein (e.g., acyl-co-enzyme A [co-A]
dehydrogenases). Also at risk are those receiving phototherapy for neonatal jaundice and
perhaps those with inadequate thyroid hormone. Some cases of riboflavin deficiency were also
observed in Russian schoolchildren (Moscow) and Southeast Asian schoolchildren (infected
with hookworm).
Toxicity
Riboflavin toxicity is not a problem because of limited intestinal absorption.
Functions
Conversion of riboflavin to flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and further to the predominant
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) occurs before these flavins form complexes with numerous
flavoprotein dehydrogenases and oxidases. These flavoco-enzymes (FMN and FASD)
participate in oxidation-reduction reactions in metabolic pathways and in energy production
via the respiratory chain (10, 11).
Biochemical indicators 
Indicators used to estimate riboflavin requirements are urinary flavin excretion, erythrocyte
glutathione reductase activity coefficient, and erythrocyte flavin. The urinary flavin excretion
rate of vitamin and metabolites reflects intake; validity of assessment of riboflavin adequacy is
improved with load test. Erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity coefficient reflects FAD
levels; results are confounded by such genetic defects as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency and heterozygous β thalassemia.
Erythrocyte flavin is mainly a measure of FMN and riboflavin after hydrolysis of labile FAD
and HPLC separation.
Riboflavin status has been assessed by measuring urinary excretion of the vitamin in
fasting, random, and 24-hour specimens or by load returns tests (amounts measured after a
specific amount of riboflavin is given orally); erythrocyte glutathione reductase; or erythrocyte
flavin concentration (6, 9, 29). The HPLC method with fluorometry gives lower values for
urinary riboflavin than do fluorometric methods, which measure the additive fluorescence of
similar flavin metabolites (30). The metabolites can comprise as much as one-third of total
32                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
urinary flavin (31, 32) and in some cases may depress assays dependent on a biologic response
because certain catabolites can inhibit cellular uptake (33). Under conditions of adequate
riboflavin uptake (≈1.5 mg/day) by adults, an estimated 120 µg (320 nmol) total riboflavin or
80 µg/g of creatinine is excreted daily (32). The erythrocyte glutathione reductase assay, with
an activity coefficient (AC) expressing the ratio of activities in the presence and absence of
added FAD, continues to be used as a main functional indicator, but some limits have been
noted. The reductase in erythrocytes from individuals with glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency (often present in blacks) has an increased avidity for FAD, which
makes this test invalid (34). Sadowski (35) has set an upper limit of normality for the AC at
1.34 based on the mean value plus 2 standard deviations from several hundreds of apparently
healthy individuals aged 60 years and over. Suggested guidelines for the interpretation of such
enzyme ACs are as follows: less than 1.2, acceptable; 1.2–1.4, low; greater than 1.4, deficient
(9). In general agreement with earlier findings on erythrocyte flavin, Ramsay et al. (36) found
a correlation between cord blood and maternal erythrocyte deficiencies and suggested that
values greater than 40 nmol/l are considered adequate.
Factors affecting requirements
Several studies reported modest effects of physical activity on the erythrocyte glutathione
reductase AC (37-41). A slight increase in the AC and decrease in urinary flavin of weight-
reducing women (39) and older women undergoing exercise training (41) were “normalised”
with 20 percent additional riboflavin. However, riboflavin supplementation did not lead to an
increase in work performance when such subjects were not clinically deficient (42-45).
Bio-availability of riboflavin in foods, mostly as digestible flavoco-enzymes, is
excellent at nearly 95 percent (6), but absorption of the free vitamin is limited to about 27 mg
per single meal or dose in an adult (46). No more than about 7 percent of food flavin is found
as 8α-FAD covalently attached to certain flavoprotein enzymes. Although some portions of the
8α-(amino acid)-riboflavins are released by proteolysis of these flavoproteins, they do not have
vitamin activity (47). A lower fat-to-carbohydrate ratio may decrease the riboflavin
requirements of the elderly (48). Riboflavin interrelates with other B vitamins, notably niacin,
which requires FAD for its formation from tryptophan, and vitamin B6, which requires FMN
for conversion of the phosphates of pyridoxine and pyridoxamine to the co-enzyme pyridoxal
5'-phosphate (PLP) (49). Contrary to earlier reports, no difference was seen in riboflavin status
of women taking oral contraceptives when dietary intake was controlled by providing a single
basic daily menu and meal pattern after 0.6 mg riboflavin/418 kJ was given in a 2-week
acclimation period (50).
Findings by age and life stage
As reviewed by Thomas et al. (51), early estimates of riboflavin content in human milk
showed changes during the post-partum period. More recent investigations of flavin
composition of both human (52) and cow (53) milk have helped clarify the nature of the
flavins present and provide better estimates of riboflavin equivalence. For human milk
consumed by infants up to age 6 months, the riboflavin equivalence averages 0.35mg (931
nmol) /l (6) or 0.26 mg (691nmol) /0.75 l of milk per day. For low-income Indian women with
erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity ratios averaging 1.80 and a milk riboflavin content
of 0.22 mg/l, breast-fed infants averaged AC ratios near 1.36 (54). Hence, a deficiency
sufficient to reduce human-milk riboflavin content by one-third can lead to a mild sub-clinical
deficiency in infants.
Studies of riboflavin status in adults include those by Belko et al. (38, 39) in modestly
obese young women on low-energy diets, by Bates et al. (55) on deficient Gambians, and by
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
33
Kuizon et al. (56) on Filipino women. Most of a 1.7-mg dose of riboflavin given to healthy
adults consuming at least this amount was largely excreted in the urine (32). Such findings
corroborate earlier work indicating a relative saturation of tissue with intakes above 1.1
mg/day. Studies by Alexander et al. (57) on riboflavin status in the elderly show that doubling
the estimated riboflavin intakes of 1.7 mg/day for women aged 70 years and over, with a
reductase AC of 1.8, led to a doubling of urinary riboflavin from 1.6–3.4 µg (4.2 to 9.0 nmol)
/mg creatinine and a decrease in AC to 1.25. Boisvert et al. (48) obtained normalisation of the
glutathione reductase AC in elderly Guatemalans with approximately 1.3 mg/day of riboflavin,
with a sharp increase in urinary riboflavin occurring at intakes above 1.0–1.1 mg/day.
Pregnant women have an increased erythrocyte glutathione reductase AC (58, 59).
Kuizon et al. (56) found that riboflavin at 0.7 mg /4184 kJ was needed to lower the AC of four
of eight pregnant women to 1.3 within 20 days, whereas only 0.41 mg/4184 kJ was needed for
five of the seven non-pregnant women. Maternal riboflavin intake was positively associated
with foetal growth in a study of 372 pregnant women (60). The additional riboflavin
requirement of 0.3 mg/day for pregnancy is an estimate based on increased growth in maternal
and foetal compartments. For lactating women, an estimated 0.3 mg riboflavin is transferred in
milk daily and, because utilisation for milk production is assumed to be 70 percent efficient,
the value is adjusted upward to 0.4 mg/day.
Recommendations 
The recommendations for riboflavin are given in Table 7.
Table 7
Recommended nutrient intakes for riboflavin
Group
mg/day
Infants and children
   0–6 months
0.3
   7–12 months
0.4
   1–3 years
0.5
   4–6 years
0.6
   7–9 years 
0.9
Adolescents, 10–18 years
   Females
   Males
1.0
1.3
Adults 
   Females, 19+ years 
1.1
   Males, 19+ years
1.3
   Pregnancy
1.4
   Lactation
1.6
Niacin
Background with requisite function in human metabolic processes
Deficiency
Niacin (nicotinic acid) deficiency classically results in pellagra, which is a chronic wasting
disease associated with a characteristic erythematous dermatitis that is bilateral and
symmetrical, a dementia after mental changes including insomnia and apathy preceding an
overt encephalopathy, and diarrhoea resulting from inflammation of the intestinal mucous
Recommended nutrient intake
34                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
surfaces (8, 9, 61). At present, pellagra occurs endemically in poorer areas of India, China,
and Africa. Its cause has been mainly attributed to a deficiency of niacin; however, its
biochemical inter-relationship to riboflavin and vitamin B6, which are needed for the
conversion of L-tryptophan to niacin equivalents (NEs), suggests that insufficiencies of these
vitamins may also contribute to pellagra (62). Pellagra-like syndromes occurring in the
absence of a dietary niacin deficiency are also attributable to disturbances in tryptophan
metabolism (e.g., Hartnup disease with impaired absorption of the amino acid and carcinoid
syndrome where the major catabolic pathway routes to 5-hydroxytryptophan) (61). Pellagra
also occurs in people with chronic alcoholism (61). Cases of niacin deficiency have been
found in people suffering from Crohn’s disease (61).
Toxicity
Although therapeutically useful in lowering serum cholesterol, administration of chronic high
oral doses of nicotinic acid can lead to hepatotoxicity as well as dermatologic manifestations.
An upper limit (UL) of 35 mg/day as proposed by the US Food and Nutrition Board (6) was
adopted by this consultation.
Functions
Niacin is chemically synonymous with nicotinic acid although the term is also used for its
amide (nicotinamide). Nicotinamide is the other form of the vitamin, which does not have the
pharmacologic action of the acid that is administered at high doses to lower blood lipids. It is
the amide form that exists within the redox-active co-enzymes, nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) and its phosphate (NADP), which function in dehydrogenase-reductase
systems requiring transfer of a hydride ion (10, 11). NAD is also required for non-redox
adenosine diphosphate–ribose transfer reactions involved in DNA repair (63) and calcium
mobilisation. NAD functions in intracellular respiration and with enzymes involved in the
oxidation of fuel substrates such as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, lactate, alcohol, 3-
hydroxybutyrate, and pyruvate. NADP functions in reductive biosyntheses such as fatty acid
and steroid syntheses and in the oxidation of glucose-6-phosphate to ribose-5-phosphate in the
pentose phosphate pathway.
Biochemical indicators
Indicators used to estimate niacin requirements are urinary excretion, plasma concentrations
of metabolites, and erythrocyte pyridine nucleotides. The excretion rate of metabolites,
mainly N'-methyl-nicotinamide and its 2- and 4-pyridones, reflects intake and is usually
expressed as a ratio of the pyridones to N'-methyl-nicotinamide. Concentrations of
metabolites, especially 2-pyridone, are measured in plasma after a load test. Erythrocyte
pyridine nucleotides measure NAD concentration changes.
Niacin status has been monitored by daily urinary excretion of methylated metabolites,
especially the ratio of the 2-pyridone to N'-methyl-nicotinamide; erythrocyte pyridine
nucleotides; oral dose uptake tests; erythrocyte NAD; and plasma 2-pyridone (6, 9). Shibata
and Matsuo (64) found that the ratio of urinary 2-pyridone to N'-methyl-nicotinamide was as
much a measure of protein adequacy as it was a measure of niacin status. Jacob et al. (65)
found this ratio too insensitive to marginal niacin intake. The ratio of the 2-pyridone to N'-
methyl-nicotinamide also appears to be associated with the clinical symptoms of pellagra,
principally the dermatitic condition (66). In plasma, 2-pyridone levels change in reasonable
proportion to niacin intake (65). Similarly to the situation for erythrocyte pyridine nucleotide
(nicotinamide co-enzymes), NAD concentration decreased 70 percent whereas NADP
remained unchanged in adult males fed diets with only 6 or 10 mg NEs/day (67). Erythrocyte
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
35
NAD provided a marker at least as sensitive as urinary metabolites of niacin in this study (67)
and in a niacin depletion study of elderly subjects (68).
Factors affecting requirements
The biosynthesis of niacin derivatives on the pathway to nicotinamide co-enzymes stems from
tryptophan, an essential amino acid found in protein, and as such this source of NEs increases
niacin intake. There are several dietary, drug, and disease factors that reduce the conversion of
tryptophan to niacin (61) (e.g. the use of oral contraceptives [69]). Although a 60-to-1
conversion factor represents the average for human utilisation of tryptophan as NEs, there are
substantial individual differences (70, 71). There is also an interdependence of enzymes within
the tryptophan-to-niacin pathway where vitamin B6 (as pyridoxal phosphate) and riboflavin (as
FAD) are functional. Further, riboflavin (as FMN) is required for the oxidase that forms co-
enzymic PLP from the alcohol and amine forms of phosphorylated vitamin B6 (49).
Findings by age and life stage
Niacin content of human milk is approximately 1.5 mg (12.3 µmol) /l and the tryptophan
content is 210 mg (1.0mmol) /l (21). Hence, the total content is approximately 5 mg NEs/l or 4
mg NEs/ 0.75 l secreted daily in human milk. Recent studies (64, 70) together with those
reported in the 1950s suggest that 12.5 mg NEs, which corresponds to 5.6 mg NEs/4184 kJ, is
minimally sufficient for niacin intake in adults.
For pregnant women, where 230 MJ is the estimated energy cost of pregnancy,
calculated needs above those of non-pregnant women are 5.6 mg NEs/ 4186 kjoule (1,000
kcal) × 230,000 kjoule (55,000 kcal), or 308 mg NEs for the entire pregnancy or 1.7 mg
NEs/day (308 mg NEs/180 days) for the second and third trimester, which is about a 10
percent increase. Also about 2 mg NEs/day is required for growth in maternal and foetal
compartments (6).
For lactating women, an estimated 1.4 mg preformed niacin is secreted daily, and an
additional requirement of less than 1 mg is needed to support the energy expenditure of
lactation. Hence, 2.4 mg NEs/day is the added need attributable to lactation.
Recommendations 
The recommendations for niacin are given in Table 8.
Table 8
Recommended nutrient intakes for niacin
Group
Infants and children
   0–6 months
2b
7–12 months
4
   1–3 years
6
   4–6 years
8
   7–9 years 
12
Adolescents, 10–18 years
16
Adults 
   Females, 19+ years 
14
   Males, 19+ years
16
Pregnancy
18
Lactation
17
a NEs, niacin equivalents. b Preformed.
Recommended nutrient intake,
NEs/daya
36                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
Vitamin B6
Background with requisite function in human metabolic processes
Deficiency
A deficiency of vitamin B6 alone is uncommon because it usually occurs in association with a
deficit in other B-complex vitamins (72). Early biochemical changes include decreased levels
of plasma PLP and urinary 4-pyridoxic acid. These are followed by decreases in synthesis of
transaminases (aminotransferases) and other enzymes of amino acid metabolism such that
there is an increased urinary xanthurenate and a decreased glutamate conversion to the anti-
neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyrate. Hypovitaminosis B6 may often occur with riboflavin
deficiency, because riboflavin is needed for the formation of the co-enzyme PLP. Infants are
especially susceptible to insufficient intakes, which can lead to epileptiform convulsions. Skin
changes include dermatitis with cheilosis and glossitis. There is usually a decrease in
circulating lymphocytes and possibly a normocytic, microcytic, or sideroblastic anaemia (9).
The sensitivity of such systems as sulphur amino acid metabolism to vitamin B6 availability is
reflected in homo-cysteinemia. A decrease in the metabolism of glutamate in the brain, which
is found in vitamin B6 insufficiency, reflects a nervous system dysfunction. As is the case with
other micronutrient deficiencies, vitamin B6 deficiency results in an impairment of the immune
system. A current concern is for the rather pandemic occurrence of somewhat low vitamin B6
intakes in many people who eat poorly (e.g., people with eating disorders). Vitamin B6
deficiency has also been observed in Russian schoolchildren (Moscow), Southeast Asian
schoolchildren (infected with hookworm), elderly Europeans (Dutch), and in some individuals
with hyperhomo-cysteinemia or on chronic hemodialysis. Several medical conditions can also
affect vitamin B6 metabolism and lead to deficiency symptoms.
Toxicity
Use of high doses of pyridoxine for dubious treatment of pre-menstrual syndrome, carpal
tunnel syndrome, and some neurologic diseases has resulted in neurotoxicity. A UL of 100
mg/day as proposed by the US Food and Nutrition Board (6) was adopted by this consultation.
Functions
There are three natural vitamers (different forms of the vitamin) of vitamin B6, namely
pyridoxine, pyridoxamine, and pyridoxal. These must be phosphorylated and the 5'-phosphates
of the first two oxidized to the functional PLP, which serves as a carbonyl-reactive co-enzyme
to diverse enzymes involved in the metabolism of amino acids. Such enzymes include
aminotransferases, decarboxylases, and dehydratases, δ-aminolevulinate synthase in heme
biosynthesis, phosphorylase in glycogen breakdown, and sphingoid base biosynthesis, etc. (10,
11).
Biochemical indicators
Indicators used to estimate vitamin B6 requirements are PLP, urinary excretion, erythrocyte
aminotransferases activity coefficients, tryptophan catabolites, erythrocyte and whole blood
PLP, and plasma homo-cysteine. PLP is the major vitamin B6 form in tissue and reflects liver
PLP; it changes fairly slowly in response to vitamin intake. The excretion rate of vitamin and
particularly 4-pyridoxate reflects intake. Erythrocyte aminotransferases for aspartate and
alanine reflect PLP levels and show large variations in activity coefficients. The urinary
excretion of xanthurenate, a tryptophan catabolite, is used especially after a tryptophan load
test.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
37
Vitamin B6 status is most appropriately evaluated by using a combination of indicators,
including those considered direct (e.g., vitamer concentration in cells or fluids) and indirect or
functional indicators (e.g., erythrocyte aminotransferase saturation by PLP or tryptophan
metabolites) (9). Plasma PLP may be the best single indicator because it appears to reflect
tissue stores (73). Kretsch et al. (74) found that diets containing less than 0.05 mg vitamin B6
given to 11 young women led to abnormal electroencephalograph patterns in 2 of the women
and a plasma PLP of approximately 9 nmol. Hence, a level of about 10 nmol is considered sub-
optimal. A cut-off for plasma PLP of 20 nmol has been proposed as an index of adequacy (6)
based on recent findings (73, 75). Plasma PLP levels have been reported to fall with age (76).
Urinary 4-pyridoxic acid level changes promptly with changes in vitamin B6 intake (73) and is
therefore of questionable value in assessing status. However, a value higher than 3 µmol/day ,
achieved with an intake of ~1 mg/d, has been suggested to reflect adequate intake (77).
Erythrocyte aminotransferases for aspartate and alanine are commonly measured before and
after addition of PLP to ascertain amounts of apoenzymes, the proportion of which increases
with vitamin B6 depletion. Values of 1.5–1.6 for the aspartate aminotransferase and
approximately 1.2 for the alanine aminotransferase have been suggested as being adequate (9,
77). Catabolites from tryptophan and methionine have also been used to assess vitamin B6
status. In a review of such literature, Leklem (77) suggested that a 24-hour urinary excretion
less than 65 µmol xanthurenate after a 2-g oral dose of tryptophan indicates normal vitamin B6
status.
Factors affecting requirements
A recent review by Gregory (78) shows that bio-availability of vitamin B6 in a mixed diet is
about 75 percent (79), with approximately 8 percent of this total contributed by pyridoxine β-
D-glucoside, which is about half as effectively utilised (78) as free B vitamers or their
phosphates. The amine and aldehyde forms of vitamin B6 may be about 10 percent less
effective than pyridoxine (80). Despite the involvement of PLP with many enzymes affecting
amino acid metabolism, there seems to be only a slight effect of dietary proteins on vitamin B6
status (81). Studies reported decreases in indicators of vitamin B6 status in women receiving
oral contraceptives (82, 83), but this probably reflects hormonal stimulation of tryptophan
catabolism rather than any deficiency of vitamin B6 per se. Subjects with pre-eclampsia or
eclampsia have lowered plasma PLP levels than do healthy pregnant women (84, 85).
Findings by age and life stage
The average intake for infants, based on human-milk content, is 0.13 mg/l (86) or 0.1 mg/0.75
l/day. With an average maternal dietary intake of vitamin B6 of 1.4 mg/day, human milk was
found to contain 0.12 mg/l, and plasma PLP of nursing infants averaged 54 nmol (87).
Extrapolation on the basis of metabolic body size, weight, and growth suggests 0.3 mg/day as
an adequate intake for infants 6–12 months of age (6). Information on vitamin B6 requirements
for children is limited, but Heiskanen et al. (88) found an age-related decrease in erythrocyte
PLP and an increase in the aspartate aminotransferase activation.
In a review of earlier studies of men with various protein intakes, Linkswiler (89)
concluded that normalisation of a tryptophan load test required 1–1.5 mg vitamin B6. Miller et
al. (90) found that 1.6 mg vitamin B6 led to plasma PLP levels above 30 nmol/l for young men
with various protein intakes. From several investigations of young women (91-94), a
requirement closer to 1–1.2 mg vitamin B6 could be estimated.
Limited studies of the elderly indicate that requirements may be somewhat higher, at
least to maintain plasma PLP above a 20-nmolar cut-off level (95, 96).
38                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
For pregnancy it was confirmed that indicators of vitamin B6 status decrease, especially
in the third trimester (85, 97, 98). It is not clear, however, whether this is a normal physiologic
phenomenon. For a maternal body store of 169 mg and foetal plus placental accumulation of
25 mg vitamin B6, about 0.1 mg/day is needed on average over gestation (6). With additional
allowances for the increased metabolic need and weight of the mother and about 75 percent of
bio-availability, an additional average requirement in pregnancy of 0.25 mg can be assumed.
Because most of this need is in the latter stages of pregnancy and vitamin B6 is not stored to
any significant extent, an extra 0.5 mg/day of vitamin B6 may be justified to err on the side of
safety.
For lactation, it may be prudent to add 0.6 mg vitamin B6 to the base requirement for
women because low maternal intakes could lead to a compromised vitamin B6 status in the
infant (99).
Recommendations 
The recommendations for vitamin B6 are given in Table 9.
Table 9
Recommended nutrient intakes for vitamin B6
Group
mg/day
Infants and children
   0–6 months
0.1
   7–12 months
0.3
   1–3 years
0.5
   4–6 years
0.6
   7–9 years 
1.0
Adolescents, 10–18 years
   Females
   Males
1.2
1.3
Adults 
   Females, 19–50 years 
1.3
   Males, 19–50 years
1.3
   Females, >50 years 
1.5
   Males, >50 years
1.7
Pregnancy
1.9
Lactation
2.0
Pantothenate
Background with requisite function in human metabolic processes
Deficiency
The widespread occurrence of releasable pantothenic acid in food makes a dietary deficiency
unlikely (8, 9, 100, 101). If a deficiency occurs, it is usually accompanied by deficits of other
nutrients. The use of experimental animals, an antagonistic analogue (ω-methyl-pantothenate)
given to humans, and more recently the feeding of semi-synthetic diets virtually free of
pantothenate (102) have all helped to define signs and symptoms of deficiency. Subjects
become irascible; develop postural hypotension, rapid heart rate on exertion, epigastric
distress with anorexia and constipation, numbness and tingling of the hands and feet ("burning
feet" syndrome); and have hyperactive deep tendon reflexes and weakness of finger extensor
Recommended nutrient intake
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
39
muscles. Some cases of pantothenate deficiency have been observed in patients with acne and
other dermatitic conditions.
Toxicity
Toxicity is not a problem with pantothenate.
Functions
Pantothenic acid is a component of CoA, a cofactor that carries acyl groups for many
enzymatic processes, and of phosphopantetheine within acyl carrier protein, a component of
the fatty acid synthase complex (10, 11). Pantothenate is most especially involved in fatty
acid metabolism but has a wide-ranging function as a prosthetic group that adds specificity to
binding with appropriate enzymes.
Biochemical indicators
Indicators used to estimate pantothenate requirements are urinary excretion and blood levels.
Excretion rate reflects intake. Whole blood, which contains vitamin and pantothenate-
containing metabolites, has a general correlation with intake; erythrocyte levels seem more
meaningful than plasma or serum levels.
Relative correspondence to pantothenate status has been reported for urinary excretion
and for blood content of both whole blood and erythrocytes (6, 9). Fry et al. (102) reported a
decline in urinary pantothenate levels from approximately 3–0.8 mg/day (13.7–3.6 µmol/day)
in young men fed a deficient diet for 84 days. Urinary excretion for a typical American diet
was found to be 2.6 mg (12µmol)/d, but it was strongly dependent on diet (79). Pantothenate
intake estimated for adolescents was significantly correlated with pantothenate in urine (103).
Whole-blood pantothenate fell from 1.95–1.41 µg/ml (8.8–6.4 µmol/l)when six adult males
were fed a pantothenate-free diet (102). Whole-blood content corresponded to intake (103),
and the range in whole blood was reported to be 1.57–2.66 µg/ml (7.2– 12.1µmol/l (104).
There is an excellent correlation of whole-blood concentrations of pantothenate with the
erythrocyte concentration, with an average value being 334 ng/ml (1.5 µmol/l) (103). The lack
of sufficient population data, however, suggests the current use of an adequate intake rather
than a recommended intake as a suitable basis for recommendations.
Factors affecting requirements
A measurement of urinary excretion of pantothenate after feeding a formula diet containing
both bound and free vitamin indicates that approximately 50 percent of the pantothenate
present in natural foods may be bio-available (79).
Findings by age and life stage
Infant requirements are based on an estimation of pantothenic acid content of human milk,
which according to reported values is approximately 2 mg/l (20, 105). For a reported average
human-milk intake of 0.75 l/day (106-108) these values suggest that 1.6 mg/day is an
adequate intake by the younger (0–6 months) infants. Taking into consideration growth and
body size, 1.9 mg/day may be extrapolated for the older (6–12 months) infant (105).
The studies of Eissenstat et al. (103) of adolescents suggest that intakes of less than 4
mg/day were sufficient to maintain blood and urinary pantothenate. Kathman and Kies (109)
found a range of pantothenate intake of 4 to approximately 8 mg/day in 12 adolescents who
were 11–16 years old. The usual pantothenate intake for American adults has been reported to
be 4–7 mg/day (102, 109-111). Hence, around 5 mg/day is apparently adequate.
40                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
For pregnancy there is only one relatively recent study that found lower blood
pantothenate levels but no difference in urinary excretion in pregnant women compared with
non-pregnant controls (112).
For lactation blood pantothenate concentrations were found significantly lower at 3
months post-partum (112). With a loss of 1.7 mg/day (7.8 µmol/d) from a lactating woman
and lower maternal blood concentrations found with intakes of about 5–6 mg/d, a
recommended intake may be 7 mg/d.
Recommendations 
The recommendations for pantothenate are given in Table 10.
Table 10
Recommended nutrient intakes for pantothenate
Group
mg/day
Infants and children
  0–6 months
1.7
  7–12 months
1.8
  1–3 years
2.0
  4–6 years
3.0
  7–9 years
4.0
Adolescents, 10–18 years
5.0
Adults
  Females, 19+
5.0
  Males, 19+
5.0
Pregnancy
6.0
Lactation
7.0
Biotin
Background with requisite function in human metabolic processes
Deficiency
Biotin deficiency in humans has been clearly documented with prolonged consumption of raw
egg whites, which contain biotin-binding avidin. Biotin deficiency was also observed in cases
of parenteral nutrition with solutions lacking biotin given to patients with short-gut syndrome
and other causes of malabsorption (9, 113, 114). Some cases of biotin deficiency were noted
in infants with intractable diaper dermatitis and in those fed special formulas. Dietary
deficiency in otherwise normal people is probably rare. Some patients have multiple
carboxylase deficiencies and there are occasional biotinidase deficiencies. Clinical signs of
deficiency include dermatitis of an erythematous and seborrheic type; conjunctivitis; alopecia;
and central nervous system abnormalities such as hypotonia, lethargy, and developmental
delay in infants and depression, hallucinations, and paresthesia of the extremities in adults. 
Toxicity
Toxicity is not a problem because of limited intestinal absorption of biotin.
Functions
Biotin functions as a co-enzyme within several carboxylases after the carboxyl function of the
vitamin becomes amide linked to the ε-amino of specific lysyl residues of the apoenzymes
(10, 11). In humans and other mammals, biotin operates within four carboxylases. Three of
Recommended nutrient intake,
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
41
the four biotin-dependent carboxylases are mitochondrial (pyruvate carboxylase,
methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, and propionyl-CoA carboxylase) whereas the fourth
(acetyl-CoA carboxylase) is found both in mitochondria and the cytosol. In all these cases
biotin serves as carrier for the transfer of active bicarbonate into a substrate to generate a
carboxyl product.
Biochemical indicators
Indicators used to estimate biotin requirements are urinary excretion and 3-hydroxyisovalerate
excretion. The excretion rate of vitamin and metabolites in urine is assessed by avidin-based
radioimmunoassay with HPLC. 3-Hydroxyisovalerate excretion inversely reflects the activity
of β-methyl-crotonyl-CoA carboxylase, which is involved in leucine metabolism.
The present indicators for biotin status are its urinary excretion, as assessed with an
avidin-based radioimmunoassay with HPLC, and 3-hydroxyisovalerate excretion (115). The
isolation and chemical identification of more than a dozen metabolites of biotin established
the main features of its use in microbes and mammals (116, 117). Quantification of the major
biotin metabolites was done by Zempleni et al. (118). Both biotin and bisnorbiotin excretions
decline in parallel in individuals on a diet containing raw egg whites (115). In these
individuals the levels of urinary 3-hydroxyisovalerate, which increase as a result of decreased
activity of β-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase and altered leucine metabolism, rose from a
normal mean of 112 to 272 µmol/24 hours. Decreased excretion of biotin, abnormally
increased excretion of 3-hydroxyisovalerate, or both have been reported for overt cases of
biotin deficiency (119-124). The lack of sufficient population data, however, suggests the
current use of an adequate intake rather than a recommended intake as a suitable basis for
recommendations.
Findings by age and life stage
The biotin content of human milk is estimated to be approximately 6 µg (24nmol)/l based on
several studies (125-127) that report values ranging from near 4–7 µg (16.4–28.9 nmol) /l.
Hence, the estimated intake of biotin for an infant consuming 0.75 l is 5 µg/day during the first
half year and for older infants is perhaps 6 µg/day.
Requirements for children and adults have been extrapolated as follows (6):
Adequate intake for child or adult = (adequate intake young infant) (weight adult or
child/weight infant) 0.75
For pregnancy there are at present insufficient data to justify an increase in the
adequate intake, although Mock et al. (128) reported decreased urinary biotin and
3-hydroxyisovalerate in a large fraction of seemingly healthy pregnant women.
For lactation the intake may need to be increased by an additional 5 µg/day to cover the
losses due to human-milk secretion.
Recommendations
The recommendations for biotin are given in Table 11.
42                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
Table 11
Recommended nutrient intakes for biotin
µg/day
Infants and children
  0–6 months
5
  7–12 months
6
  1–3 years
8
  4–6 years
12
  7–9 years
20
Adolescents, 10–18 years
25
Adults
  Females, 19+
30
  Males, 19+
30
Pregnancy
30
Lactation
35
Group
General considerations for B-complex vitamins 
Notes on suggested recommendations 
The recommendations for infants are based largely on the composition and quantity of human
milk consumed and are formally considered to be adequate intakes. Younger (0–6 months)
infants are considered to derive adequate intake from milk alone; recommendations for older
(7–12 months) infants are adjusted by metabolic scaling such that a factor – (weight of 7-12
mo/weight of 0-5 mo) 0.75 – is multiplied by the recommendation for the younger infant (6).
Recommendations have been given to use the higher (6–11 months) level for the first year of
life.
For most of the B vitamins, there is little or no direct information that can be used to
estimate the amounts required by children and adolescents. Hence, an extrapolation from the
adult level has been used where a factor – (weight child/weight adult) 0.75 × (1 + growth factor)
– is multiplied by the adult recommendation (6).
For most of the B-complex vitamins covered here, data are not sufficient to justify
altering recommendations for the elderly.
For pregnancy and lactation, increased maternal needs related to increases in energy
and replacement of secretion losses were considered.
Dietary sources of B-complex vitamins
A listing of some better and usual food sources for the vitamins considered is given in
Table 12.
Recommended nutrient intake
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
43
Table 12
Dietary sources of water-soluble vitamins
Vitamin
Good-to-moderate dietary sourcesa
Thiamin (B1)
Pork, organ meats, whole grains, and legumes
Riboflavin (B2)
Milk and dairy products, meats, and green
vegetables
Niacin (nicotinic acid and
nicotinamide)
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine,
pyridoxamine, and
pyridoxal)
Pantothenic acid
Animal tissues, whole-grain cereals, and
legumes; widely distributed
Biotin
Liver, yeast, egg, yolk, soy flour, and cereals
aFoods are listed according to the concentrations of vitamin which they contain.
Research suggestions
In view of the issues raised in this section on B-complex vitamins, the following suggestions
are noted:
• Actual requirements are least certain for children, adolescents, pregnant and lactating
women, and the elderly, and as such they deserve further study.
• Studies need to include graded levels of the vitamin above and below current
recommendations and should consider or establish clearly defined cut-off values for
clinical adequacy and inadequacy and be conducted for periods of time sufficient for
ascertaining equilibrium dynamics.
• For status indicators, additional functional tests would be useful for riboflavin (e.g., the
activity of FMN-dependent pyridoxine [pyridoxamine] 5'-phosphate oxidase in
erythrocytes), niacin (e.g., sensitive blood measures, especially of NAD), and perhaps
pantothenate.
• The food content and bio-availability of pantothenate and biotin need further investigation
to establish the available and preferred food sources reasonable for different populations.
Primary efforts should now be in the arena of public health and nutrition education
with emphasis on directing people and their governments to available and healthful foods;
care necessary for their storage and preparation; and achievable means for adjusting intake
with age, sex, and health status.
Liver, lean meats, grains, and legumes; can be
formed from tryptophan
Meats, vegetables, and whole-grain cereals
44                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
1. United Nations Sub-Committee on Nutrition. 1988. Report on the Nutrition Situation of
Refugees and Displaced Populations. No. 25; p.5.,  Geneva, Switzerland.
2. Sadun, J. Martone, R. Muci-Mendoza, L. Reyes, J. C. Silva & B. Caballero. 1994
Epidemic optic neuropathy in Cuba: eye findings. Arch. Ophthalmol., 112: 691-699.
3. O. Ordunez-Garcia, J. F. Nieto, A. D. Espinosa-Brito & B. Caballero. 1996. Cuban
epidemic neuropathy, 1991-1994: history repeats itself a century after the "amblyopia of
the blockade". Am. J. Public Health, 86 (5): 738-743.
4. R. Hedges, K. Tucker, M. Hirano & B. Caballero. 1997 Epidemic optic and peripheral
neuropathy in Cuba: the unique geopolitical public health problem. Surveys Ophthalmol.,
41: 341-353.
5. FAO/WHO. 1974. Handbook on Human Nutritional Requirements, eds. Passmore R,
Nicol BM, Rao M. Narayana, Beaton GH, de Mayer EM. FAO Nutritional Studies No.28;
WHO Monograph Series No. 61, Rome, Italy.
6. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine/National Academy of Sciences-
National Research Council. 1998. Dietary Reference Intake: Folate, Other B Vitamins,
and Choline. Washington, D.C.,  National Academy Press.
7. McCormick, D.B. Thiamin. 1988. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 6th
edition. Shils, M.E., Young V.R., eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, p. 355-61.
8. McCormick, D.B. 1997. Vitamin, Structure and Function of. In: Encyclopedia of
Molecular Biology and Molecular Medicine, Vol. 6. Meyers, R.A., ed. Weinheim: VCH,
p.  244-52.
9. McCormick, D.B & Greene, H.L. 1994. Vitamins. In: Tietz Textbook of Clin Chem., 2nd
edition. Burtis, V.A., Ashwood, E.R., eds. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, p.  1275-1316.
10. McCormick, D.B. 1996. Co-enzymes, Biochemistry of. In: Encyclopedia of Molecular
Biology and Molecular Medicine, Vol. 1. Meyers, R.A., ed. Weinheim: VCH, p. 396-406.
11. McCormick, D.B. 1997. Co-enzymes, Biochemistry. In: Encyclopedia of Human Biology
2nd edition. Dulbecco, R., ed.-in-chief. San Diego: Academic Press, p. 847-64.
12. Bayliss, R.M., Brookes, R., McCulloch, J., Kuyl, J.M. & Metz, J. 1984. Urinary
thiamine excretion after oral physiological doses of the vitamin. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res., 54:
161-4.
13. Gans, D.A. & Harper, A.E. 1991. Thiamin status of incarcerated and nonincarcerated
adolescent males: dietary intake and thiamin pyrophosphate response. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
1991; 53: 1471-5.
14. Schrijver, J. Biochemical markers for micronutrient status and their interpretation. In:
Modern Lifestyles, Lower Energy Intake and Micronutrient Status. Pietrzik, K., ed.
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, p. 55-85.
15. Bailey, A.L., Finglas, P.M., Wright, A.J. & Southon, S. 1994. Thiamin intake,
erythrocyte transketolase (EC 2.2.1.1) activity and total erythrocyte thiamin in
adolescents. Br. J. Nutr., 72: 111-25.
16. Singleton, C.K., Pekovich, S.R., McCool, B.A. & Martin, P.R. 1995. The thiamine-
dependent hysteretic behavior of Human transketolase: implications for thiamine
deficiency. J. Nutr., 125: 189-194.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
45
17. Baines, M. & Davies, G. 1988. The evaluation of erythrocyte thiamin diphosphate as an
indicator of thiamin status in man, and its comparison with erythrocyte transketolase
activity measurements. Annals Clin. Biochem., 1988; 25 (Part 6): 698-705.
18. Gerrits, J., Eidhof, H., Brunnekreeft, J.W. & Hessels, J. Determination of thiamin and
thiamin phosphates in whole blood by reversed-phase liquid chromatography with
precolumn derivatization. In: Methods in Enzymology. Vitamins and Co-enzymes.
McCormick, D.B., Suttie, J.W., Wagner, C., eds. San Diego: Academic Press, 279: 74-82.
19. Fogelholm, M., Rehunen, S., Gref, C.G., Laakso, J.I., Lehto, J., Ruskonen, I. &
Himberg, J.J. 1992. Dietary intake and thiamin, iron, and zinc status in elite Nordic
skiers during different training periods. Int. J. Sport Nutr., 2: 351-65.
20. van der Beek, E.J., van Dokkum, W., Wedel, M., Schrijver & van den Berg, H. 1994.
Thiamin, riboflavin and vitamin B6: impact of restricted intake on physical performance
in man. J. Am. Coll. Nutr., 13: 629-40.
21. Committee on Nutrition. 1985.  Composition of Human milk: normative data. In:
Pediatric Nutrition Handbook, 2nd Edition.  Elk Grove Village, IL: Am. Acad. Pediatr.,
p.363-368.
22. Wyatt, D.T., Nelson, D. & Hillman, R.E. 1991. Age-dependent changes in thiamin
concentrations in whole blood and cerebrospinal fluid in infants and children. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 53: 530-6.
23. Sauberlich, H.E., Herman, Y.F., Stevens, C.O. & Herman, R.H. 1979. Thiamin
requirement of the adult Human. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 32: 2237-48.
24. Wood, B., Gijsbers, A., Goode, A., Davis, S., Mulholland, J. & Breen, K. 1980. A
study of partial thiamin restriction in Human volunteers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 33: 848-61.
25. Anderson, S. H., Charles, T.J. & Nicol, A.D. 1985. Thiamine deficiency at a district
general hospital: report of five cases. Q. J. Med., 55: 15-32.
26. Hoorn, R.K., Flikweert, J.P. & Westerink, D. 1975. Vitamin B1, B2 and B6 deficiencies
in geriatric patients, measured by co-enzyme stimulation of enzyme activities. Clinica
Chimica Acta, 61: 151-62.
27. Nichols, H.K. & Basu, T.K. 1994. Thiamin status of the elderly: dietary intake and
thiamin pyrophosphate response. J. Am. Coll. Nutr., 13: 57-61.
28. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine/National Academy of Sciences-
National Research Council. 1990. Nutrition During Pregnancy. Part I Weight Gain. Part
II Nutrient Supplements. Washington, D.C, National Academy Press.
29. McCormick, D.B. 1994. Riboflavin. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 8th
edition. Shils, M.E., Olson, J.A., Shike, M., eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, p. 366-75.
30. Smith, M.D. 1980. Rapid method for determination of riboflavin in urine by high-
performance liquid chromatography. J. Chromatogr., 182: 285-91.
31. Chastain, J.L. & McCormick, D.B. 1987. Flavin catabolites: identification and
quantitation in Human urine. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 46: 830-4.
32. Roughead, Z.K. & McCormick, D.B. 1991. Urinary riboflavin and its metabolites:
effects of riboflavin supplementation in healthy residents of rural Georgia (USA). Eur. J.
Clin. Nutr., 45: 299-307.
33. Aw, T.-Y., Jones, D.P. & McCormick, D.B. 1983. Uptake of riboflavin by isolated rat
liver cells. J. Nutr., 113: 1249-54.
34. Nichoalds, G.E. 1981. Riboflavin. Symposium in Laboratory Medicine. In: Labbac RF,
ed. Symposium on Laboratory Assessment of Nutritional Status. Clinics in Laboratory
Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1: 685-98.
46                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
35. Sadowski, J.A. 1992. Riboflavin. In: Nutrition in the Elderly. The Boston Nutritional
Status Survey. Hartz, S.C., Russell, R.M., Rosenberg, I.H. eds. London: Smith-Gordon, p.
119-25.
36. Ramsay, V.P., Neumann, C., Clark, V. & Swenseid, M.E. 1983. Vitamin cofactor
saturation indices for riboflavin, thiamine, and pyridoxine in placental tissue of Kenyan
women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37: 969-73.
37. Belko, A.Z., Obarzanek, E., Kalkwarf, H.J., Rotter, M.A., Bogusz, S., Miller, D.,
Haas, J.D. & Roe, D.A. 1983. Effects of exercise on riboflavin requirements of young
women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37: 509-17.
38. Belko, A.Z., Obarzanek, E., Roach, R., Rotten, M., Urban, G., Weinberg, S. & Roe,
D.A. 1984. Effects of aerobic exercise and weight loss on riboflavin requirements of
moderately obese, marginally deficient young women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 40: 553-61.
39. Belko, A.Z., Meredith, M.P., Kalkwarf, H.J., Obarzanek, E., Weinberg, S., Roach,
R., McKeon, G. & Roe, D.A. 1985. Effects of exercise on riboflavin requirements:
biological validation in weight reducing women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 41: 270-7.
40. Soares, M.J., Satyanarayana, K., Bamji, M.S., Jacob, C.M., Ramana, Y.V. & Rao,
S.S. 1993. The effect of exercise on the riboflavin status of adult men. Br. J. Nutr., 69:
541-51.
41. Winters, L.R., Yoon, J.S., Kalkwarf, H.J., Davies, J.C., Berkowitz, M.G., Haas, J. &
Roe, D.A. 1992. Riboflavin requirements and exercise adaptation in older women. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 56: 526-32.
42. Powers, H.J., Bates, C.J., Eccles, M., Brown, H. & George, E. 1987. Bicycling
performance in Gambian children: effects of supplements of riboflavin or ascorbic acid.
Human. J. Clin. Nutr., 41: 59-69.
43. Prasad, A.P., Bamji, M.S., Lakshmi, A.V. & Satyanarayana, K. 1990. Functional
impact of riboflavin supplementation in urban school children. Nutr Res., 10: 275-81.
44. Tremblay, A., Boilard, M., Bratton, M.F., Bessette, H. & Roberge, A.B. 1984. The
effects of a riboflavin supplementation on the nutritional status and performance of elite
swimmers. Nutr Res., 4: 201-8.
45. Weight, L.M., Myburgh, K.H. & Noakes, T.D. 1988. Vitamin and mineral
supplementation: effect on the running performance of trained athletes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
47: 192-5.
46. Zempleni, J., Galloway, J.R. & McCormick, D.B. 1996. Pharmacokinetics of orally and
intravenously administered riboflavin in healthy Humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 63: 54-66.
47. Chia, C.P., Addison, R. & McCormick, D.B. 1978. Absorption, metabolism, and
excretion of 8a-(amino acid)-riboflavins in the rat. J. Nutr., 108: 373-81.
48. Boisvert, W.A., Mendoza, I., Castañeda, C., DePortocarrero, L., Solomons, N.W.,
Gershoff, S.N. & Russell, R.M.  193. Riboflavin requirement of healthy elderly Humans
and its relationship to macronutrient composition of the diet. J. Nutr., 123: 915-25.
49. McCormick, D.B. 1989. Two interconnected B vitamins: riboflavin and pyridoxine.
Physiol. Revs., 69: 1170-98.
50. Roe, D.A., Bogusz, S., Sheu, J. & McCormick, D.B. 1982. Factors affecting riboflavin
requirements of oral contraceptive users and nonusers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 35: 495-501.
51. Thomas, M.R., Sneed, S.M., Wei, C., Nail, P.A., Wilson, M. & Sprinkle, E.E., III.
1980. The effects of vitamin C, vitamin B6, vitamin B12, folic acid, riboflavin, and
thiamin on the breast milk and maternal status of well-nourished women at 6 months
postpartum. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 33: 2151-6.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
47
52. Roughead, Z.K. & McCormick, D.B. 1990. Flavin composition of Human milk. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 52: 854-7.
53. Roughead, Z.K. & McCormick, D.B. 1990. A qualitative and quantitative assessment of
flavins in cow's milk. J. Nutr., 120: 382-8.
54. Bamji, M.S., Chowdhury, N., Ramalakshmi, B.A. & Jacob, C.M. 1991. Enzymatic
evaluation of riboflavin status of infants. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 45: 309-13.
55. Bates, C.J., Powers, H.J., Downes, R., Brubacher, D., Sutcliffe, V. & Thurnhill, A.
1989. Riboflavin status of adolescent vs. elderly Gambian subjects before and during
supplementation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 50: 825-9.
56. Kuizon, M.D., Natera, M.G., Alberto, S.P., Perlas, L.A., Desnacido, J.A., Avena,
E.M., Tajaon, R.T. & Macapinlac, M.P. 1992. Riboflavin requirement of Filipino
women. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 46: 257-64.
57. Alexander, M., Emanuel, G., Golin, T., Pinto, J.T. & Rivlin, R.S. 1984. Relation of
riboflavin nutriture in healthy elderly to intake of calcium and vitamin supplements:
evidence against riboflavin supplementation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 39: 540-6.
58. Bates, C.J., Prentice, A.M., Paul, A.A., Sutcliffe, B.A., Watkinson, M. & Whitehead,
R.G.  1981. Riboflavin status in Gambian pregnant and lactating women and its
implications for recommended Dietary Allowances. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 928-35.
59. Vir, S.C., Love, A.H. & Thompson, W. 1981. Riboflavin status during pregnancy. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 2699-705.
60. Badart-Smook, A., van Houwelingen, A.C., Al, M.D., Kester, A.D. & Hornstra, G.
1997. Foetal growth is associated positively with maternal intake of riboflavin and
negatively with maternal intake of linoleic acid. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 97: 867-70.
61. McCormick, D.B. 1988. Niacin. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 6th edition.
Shils, M.E., Young, V.R., eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 370-5.
62. Carpenter, K.J. & Lewin, W.J. 1985. A reexamination of the composition of diets
associated with pellagra. J. Nutr., 115: 543-52.
63. Berger, N.A. 1985. Poly(ADP-ribose) in the cellular response to DNA damage. Radiat.
Res., 101: 4-15.
64. Shibata, K. & Matsuo, H. 1989. Effect of supplementing low protein diets with the
limiting amino acids on the excretion of N1-methylnicotinamide and its pyridones in rat. J.
Nutr., 119: 896-901.
65. Jacob, R.A., Swendseid, M.E., McKee, R.W., Fu, C.S. & Clemens, R.A. 1989.
Biochemical markers for assessment of niacin status in young men: urinary and blood
levels of niacin metabolites. J. Nutr., 119: 591-8.
66. Dillon, J.C., Malfait, P., Demaux, G. & Foldi-Hope, C. 1992. The urinary metabolites
of niacin during the course of pellagra. Ann. Nutr. Metab., 36: 181-5.
67. Fu, C.S., Swendseid, M.E., Jacob, R.A. & McKee, R.W. 1989. Biochemical markers
for assessment of niacin status in young men: levels of erythrocyte niacin co-enzymes and
plasma tryptophan. J. Nutr., 119: 1949-55.
68. Ribaya-Mercado. J.D., Russell, R.M., Rasmussen, H.M., Crim, M.C., Perrone-Petty,
G. & Gershoff, S.N. 1997. Effect of niacin status on gastrointestinal function and serum
lipids. FASEB J., 11: A179 abstract.
69. Rose, D.P. & Braidman, I.P. 1971. Excretion of tryptophan metabolites as affected by
pregnancy, contraceptive steroids, and steroid hormones. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 24: 673-83.
48                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
70. Patterson, J.I., Brown, R.R., Linkswiler, H. & Harper, A.E. 1980. Excretion of
tryptophan-niacin metabolites by young men: effects of tryptophan, leucine, and vitamin
B6 intakes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 33: 2157-67.
71. Horwitt, M.K., Harper, A.E. & Henderson, L.M. 1981. Niacin-tryptophan relationships
for evaluating for evaluating niacin equivalents. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 423-7.
72. McCormick, D.B. 1988. Vitamin B6. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 6th
edition. Shils, M.E., Young, V.R., eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, p. 376-82.
73. Liu, A., Lumeng, L., Aronoff, G.R. & Li, T.-K. 1985. Relationship between body store
of vitamin B6 and plasma pyridoxal-P clearance: metabolic balance studies in Humans. J.
Lab. Clin. Med., 106: 491-7.
74. Kretsch, M.J., Sauberlich, H.E. & Newbrun, E. 1991. Electroencephalographic
changes and periodontal status during short-term vitamin B6 depletion of young,
nonpregnant women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 1266-74.
75. Bailey, A.L., Wright, A.J.A. & Southon, S. 1999. Pyridoxal-5-phosphate determination
in Human plasma by high performance liquid chromatography: How appropriate are cut-
off values for vitamin B6 deficiency? Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 53(6): 448-55.
76. Hamfelt, A. & Tuvemo, T. 1972. Pyridoxal phosphate and folic acid concentration in
blood and erythrocyte aspartate aminotransferase activity during pregnancy. Clinica
Chimica Acta, 41: 287-98.
77. Lekem, J.E. 1990. Vitamin B6: a status report. J. Nutr., 120(11): 1503-7.
78. Gregory, J.F. III. 1997. Bio-availability of vitamin B6. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 51(1): S43-8.
79. Tarr, J.B., Tamura, T. & Stokstad, E.L. 1981. Availability of vitamin B6 and
pantothenate in an average American diet in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 1328-37.
80. Wozenski, J.R., Leklen, J.E. & Miller, L.T. 1980. The metabolism of small doses of
vitamin B6 in men. J. Nutr., 110: 275-85.
81. Pannemans, D.L.E., van den Berg, H. & Westerterp, K.R. 1994. The influence of
protein intake on vitamin B6 metabolism differs in young and elderly Humans. J. Nutr.,
124: 1207-14.
82. Shane, B. & Contractor, S.F. 1975. Assessment of vitamin B6 status. Studies on
pregnant women and oral contraceptive users. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 28: 739-47.
83. Rose, D.P. 1978. Oral contraceptives and vitamin B6. In: Human Vitamin B6
Requirements (Proceedings of a Workshop). P. 193-201. Washington, D.C., National
Academy Press.
84. Brophy, M.H. & Siiteri, P.K. 1975. Pyridoxal phosphate and hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol., 121: 1075-9.
85. Shane, B. & Contractor, S.F. 1980.Vitamin B6 Status and metabolism in pregnancy. In:
Vitamin B6 metabolism and role in growth. Tryfiates, G.P., ed. Westport, Connecticut:
Food & Nutrition Press, p. 137-71.
86. West, K.D. & Kirksey, A. 1976.  Influence of vitamin B6 intake on the content of the
vitamin in Human milk. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 29: 961-9.
87. Andon, M.B., Reynolds, R.D., Moser-Veillon, P.B. & Howard, M.P. 1989. Dietary
intake of total and glycosylated vitamin B6 and the vitamin B6 nutritional status of
unsupplemented lactating women and their infants. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 50: 1050-8.
88. Heiskanen, K., Kallio, M., Salmenperä, L., Siimes, M.A., Roukonen, I. &
Perkeentupa, J. 1995. Vitamin B6 status during childhood: tracking from 2 months to 11
years of age. J. Nutr., 125: 2985-92.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
49
89. Linkswiler, H.M. 1978. Vitamin B6 requirements of men. In: Human Vitamin B6
Requirements (Proceedings of a workshop). p. 279-90. Washington, D.C., National
Academy Press. 
90. Miller, L.T., Leklem, J.E. & Shultz, T.D. 1985. The effect of dietary protein on the
metabolism of vitamin B6 in Humans. J. Nutr., 115: 1663-72.
91. Brown R.R., Rose, D.P., Leklem, J. E., Linkswiler, H. & Anand, R. 1975. Urinary
4-pyridoxic acid, plasma pyridoxal phosphate, and erythrocyte aminotransferase levels in
oral contraceptive users receiving controlled intakes of vitamin B6. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 28:
10-19.
92. Kretsch, M.J., Sauberlich, H.E., Skala, J.H. & Johnson, H.L. 1995. Vitamin B6
requirement and status assessment: young women fed a depletion diet followed by a plant-
or animal- protein diet with graded amounts of vitamin B6. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 61: 1091-
101.
93. Hansen, C.M., Leklem, J.E. & Miller, L.T. 1996. Vitamin B6 status of women with a
constant intake of vitamin B6 changes with three levels of dietary protein. J. Nutr., 126:
1891-901.
94. Hansen, C.M., Leklem, J.E. & Miller, L.T. 1997. Changes in vitamin B6 status
indicators of women fed a constant protein diet with varying levels of vitamin B-6. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 66: 1379-87.
95. Ribaya-Mercado, J.D., Russell, R.M., Sahyoun, N., Morrow, F.D. & Gershoff, S.N.
1991. Vitamin B6 requirements of elderly men and women. J. Nutr., 121: 1062-74.
96. Selhub, J., Jacques, P.F., Wilson, P.W.F., Rush, D. & Rosenherg, I.H. 1993 .Vitamin
status and intake as primary determinants of homo-cysteinemia in an elderly population.
JAMA, 270: 2693-8.
97. Cleary, R.E., Lumeng, L. & Li, T.-K. 1975. Maternal and foetal plasma levels of
pyridoxal phosphate at term: adequacy of vitamin B6 supplementation during pregnancy.
Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol., 121: 25-8.
98. Lumeng, L., Cleary, R.E., Wagner, R., Yu, P.-L. & Li, T.-K. 1976. Adequacy of
vitamin B6 supplementation during pregnancy: a prospective study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 29:
1376-83.
99. Borschel, M.W. 1995. Vitamin B6 in infancy: requirements and current feeding practices.
In: Vitamin B6 Metabolism in Pregnancy, Lactation and Infancy. Raiten, D.J., ed. Boca
Raton, Florida: CRC Press, Inc., p. 109-24.
100. McCormick, D.B. 1988. Pantothenic Acid. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease,
6th edition. p.383-7. Shils, M.E., Young, V.R., eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger. 
101. Plesofsky-Vig, N. 1994. Pantothenic acid and co-enzyme A. In: Modern Nutrition in
Health and Disease, 8th edition. Shils, M.E., Olson, J.A., Shike, M., eds. Philadelphia, Lea
& Febiger, p. 395-401.
102. Fry, P.C., Fox, H.M. & Tao, H.G. 1976. Metabolic response to a pantothenic acid
deficient diet in Humans. J. Nat. Sci.Vit., 22: 339-46.
103. Eissenstat, B.R., Wyse, B.W. & Hansen, R.G. 1986. Pantothenic acid status of
adolescents. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 44: 931-7.
104. Wittwer, C.T., Schweitzer, C., Pearson, J., Song, W.O., Windham, C.T., Wyse, B.W.
& Hansen, R.G. 1989. Enzymes for liberation of pantothenic acid in blood: use of plasma
pantetheinase. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 50: 1072-8.
105. Picciano, M.F. 1995. Vitamins in milk. A. Water-soluble vitamins in Human milk. In:
Handbook of Milk Composition. Jensen, R.G., ed. San Diego: Academic Press.
50                   Chapter 3: Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin,vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin
106. Butte, N.F., Garza, G., Smith, E.O. & Nichols, B.L. 1984. Human milk intake and
growth in exclusively breast-fed infants. J. Pediatr., 104: 187-95.
107. Allen, J.C., Keller, R.P., Archer, P. & Neville, M.C. 1991. Studies in Human lactation:
milk composition and daily secretion rates of macronutrients in the first year of lactation.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 69-80.
108. Heinig, M.J., Nommsen, L.A., Peerson, J.M., Lonnerdal, B. & Dewey, K.G. 1993.
Energy and protein intakes of breast-fed and formula-fed infants during the first year of
life an their association with growth velocity: the DARLING Study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
58: 152-61.
109. Kathman, J.V. & Kies, C. 1984. Pantothenic acid status of free living adolescent and
young adults. Nutr. Res., 4: 245-50.
110. Srinivasan, V., Christensen, N., Wyse, B.W. & Hansen, R.G. Pantothenic acid
nutritional status in the elderly-institutionalized and noninstitutionalized. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 34: 1736-42.
111. Bul, N.L., Buss & D.H. Biotin. 1982. Pantothenic acid and vitamin E in the British
household food supply. Hum. Nutr: Appl. Nutr., 36A: 125-9.
112. Song, W.O., Wyse, B.W. & Hansen, R.G. 1985. Pantothenic acid status of pregnant and
lactating women. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 85: 192-8.
113. McCormick, D.B. 1988. Biotin. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 6th edition.
Shils, M.E., Young, V.R., eds. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, p. 436-9.
114. Mock, D.M. 1996. Biotin. In: Present Knowledge in Nutrition, 7th edition. Ziegler, E.E.,
Filer, L.J., Jr., eds. p. 220-35. Washington, D.C.: International Life Sciences Institute-
Nutrition Foundation.
115. Mock, N.I., Malik, M.I., Stumbo, P.J., Bishop, W.P. & Mock, D.M. 1997. Increased
urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and decreased urinary excretion of biotin are
sensitive early indicators of decreased status in experimental biotin deficiency. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 65: 951-8.
116. McCormick, D.B. & Wright, L.D. 1971. The metabolism of biotin and analogues. In:
Comprehensive Biochemistry, Vol. 21. Florkin, M., Stotz, E.H., eds. p. 81-110.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
117. McCormick, D.B. 1976. Biotin. In: Present Knowledge in Nutrition, 4th edition. Hegsted,
M., ed. Washington, D.C.: The Nutrition Foundation, p. 217-25.
118. Zempleni, J., McCormick, D.B. & Mock, D.M. 1997. Identification of biotin sulfone,
bisnorbiotin methylketone, and tetranorbiotin-l-sulfoxide in Human urine. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 65: 508-11.
119. Mock, D.M., deLorimer, A.A., Liebman, W.M., Sweetman, L. & Baker, H. 1981.
Biotin deficiency: an unusual complication of parenteral alimentation. N. Engl. J. Med.,
304: 820-3.
120. Kien, C.L., Kohler, E., Goodman, S.I., Berlow, S., Hong, R., Horowitz, S.P. &
Baker, H. 1981. Biotin-responsive in vivo carboxylase deficiency in two siblings with
secretory diarrhea receiving total parenteral nutrition. J. Pediatr., 99: 546-50.
121. Gillis, J., Murphy, F.R., Boxall, L.B. & Pencharz, P.B. 1982. Biotin deficiency in a
child 
on 
long-term 
TPN. 
J. 
Parenteral 
Enternal 
Nutr., 
6: 
308-10.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
51
122. Mock, D.M., Baswell, D.L., Baker, H., Holman, R.T. & Sweetman, L. 1985. Biotin
deficiency complicating parenteral alimentation: diagnosis, metabolic repercussions, and
treatment. J. Pediatr., 106: 762-9.
123. Lagier, P., Bimar, P., Seriat-Gautier, S., Dejode, J.M., Brun, T. & Bimar, J. 1987.
Zinc and biotin deficiency during prolonged parenteral nutrition in infant. Press
Medicine, 16: 1795-7.
124. Carlson, G.L., Williams, N., Barber, D., Shaffer, J.L., Wales, S., Isherwood, D.,
Shenkin, A. & Irving, M.H. 1995. Biotin deficiency complicating long-term parenteral
nutrition in an adult patient. Clin. Nutr., 14: 186-90.
125. Paul, A.A., Southgate, D.A.T. McCance & Widdowson's. 1978. The Composition of
Foods. London: H.M. Stationery Office. 
126. Salmenpera, L., Perheentupa, J., Pipsa, J.P. & Siimes, M.A. 1985. Biotin
concentrations in maternal plasma and milk during prolonged lactation. Int. J. Vit. Nutr.
Res., 55: 281-5.
127. Hirano, M., Honma, K., Daimatsu, T., Hayakawa, K., Oizumi, J., Zaima, K. &
Kanke, Y. 1992. Longitudinal variations of biotin content in Human milk. Int. J. Vit.
Nutr. Res., 62: 281-2.
128. Mock, D.M., Stadler, D.D., Stratton, S.L. & Mock, N.I. 1997. Biotin status assessed
longitudinally in pregnant women. J. Nutr., 127: 710-6.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
53
Role of folate and folic acid in human metabolic processes
F
olates accept one-carbon units from donor molecules and passes them on via various
biosynthetic reactions (1). In their reduced form cellular folates function conjugated to a
polyglutamate chain. These folates are a mixture of unsubstituted polyglutamyl
tetrahydrofolates and various substituted one-carbon forms of tetrahydrofolate (e.g., 10-
formyl, 5,10-methylene, and 5-methyl) (Figure 6). The reduced forms of the vitamin,
particularly the unsubstituted dihydro and tetrahydro forms, are unstable chemically. They are
easily split between the C-9 and N-10 bond to yield a substituted pteridine and
p-aminobenzoylglutamate, which have no biologic activity (2). Substituting a carbon group at
N-5 or N-10 decreases the tendency of the molecule to split; however, the substituted forms
are also susceptible to oxidative chemical rearrangements and, consequently, loss of activity
(2). The folates found in food consist of a mixture of reduced folate polyglutamates.
Although natural folates rapidly lose activity in foods over periods of days or weeks,
folic acid (e.g., in fortified foods) is almost completely stable for months or even years. The
chemical lability of all naturally occurring folates results in a significant loss of biochemical
activity during harvesting, storage, processing, and preparation. Half or even three-quarters of
initial folate activity may be lost during these processes. This is in contrast to the stability of
the synthetic form of this vitamin, folic acid (2). In this form the pteridine (2-amino-4-
hydroxypteridine) ring is not reduced (Figure 6), rendering it very resistant to chemical
oxidation. However, folic acid is reduced in cells by the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase to
the di- and tetrahydro forms (Figure 7). This takes place within the intestinal mucosal cells,
and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate is released into the plasma.
Natural folates found in foods are all conjugated to a polyglutamyl chain containing
different numbers of glutamic acids depending on the type of food. This polyglutamyl chain is
removed in the brush border of the mucosal cells by the enzyme folate conjugase, and folate
monoglutamate is subsequently absorbed (1). The primary form of folate entering human
circulation from the intestinal cells is 5-methyltetrahydrofolate monoglutamate. This process
is, however, limited in capacity. If enough folic acid is given orally, unaltered folic acid
appears in the circulation (3), is taken up by cells, and is reduced by dihydrofolate reductase
to tetrahydrofolate
The bio-availability of natural folates is affected by the removal of the polyglutamate
chain by the intestinal conjugase. This process is apparently not complete (4), thereby
reducing the bio-availability of natural folates by as much as 25–50 percent. In contrast,
synthetic folic acid appears to have a bio-availability of close to 100 percent (4, 5). The low
bio-availability and – more importantly – the poor chemical stability of the natural folates has
a profound influence on the development of nutrient recommendations. This is particularly
true if some of the dietary intake is in the synthetic form, folic acid, which is much more
stable and bio-available. Food fortification of breakfast cereals, flour, etc. can add significant
amounts of folic acid to the diet.
Functional folates have one-carbon groups derived from several metabolic precursors
(e.g., serine, N-formino-L-glutamate, folate, etc.). With 10-formyltetrahydrofolate the formyl
Chapter 4
Folate and folic acid
54
    Chapter 4: Folate and folic acid
group is incorporated sequentially into C-2 and C-8 of the purine ring during its biosynthesis.
Likewise the conversion of deoxyuridylate (a precursor to RNA) into thymidylate  (a
precursor 
to 
DNA) 
is 
catalysed 
by 
thymidylate 
synthase, 
which 
requires
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofofate. Thus, folate in its reduced and polyglutamylated forms is
essential for the DNA biosynthesis cycle shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6
The chemical formula of folic acid (synthetic form)
and the most important natural folates.
Note: In cells and thus in food the latter are conjugated to a polyglutamate tail.
The enzyme methionine synthase requires vitamin B12 as well as folate for activity.
The role of the folate co-factors in the DNA cycle and the methylation cycle.
Figure 7
56                                                                                               Chapter 4: Folate and folic acid
Alternatively 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate can be channelled to the methylation
cycle (1). This cycle has two functions. It ensures that the cell always has an adequate supply
of S-adenosylmethionine, an activated form of methionine, which acts as a methyl donor to a
wide range of methyltransferases. These enzymes methylate a wide range of substrates
including lipids, hormones, DNA, proteins, etc. One such important methylation is that of
myelin basic protein, which acts as insulation for nerves cells. When the methylation cycle is
interrupted as it is during vitamin B12 deficiency, one of the clinical consequences is the
demyelination of nerve resulting in a neuropathy which leads to ataxia, paralysis, and, if
untreated, ultimately death. Other important methyltransferase enzymes down-regulate DNA
and suppress cell division (1).
In the liver the methylation cycle also serves to degrade methionine. Methionine is an
essential amino acid in Humans and is present in the diet of people in developed countries at
about 60 percent over that required for protein synthesis and other uses. The excess
methionine is degraded via the methylation cycle to homo-cysteine, which can either be
catabolised to sulfate and pyruvate (with the latter being used for energy) or remethylated to
methionine. The need to maintain intracellular S-adenosylmethionine levels is related to the
amount of methionine metabolised via homo-cysteine.
The DNA and methylation cycles both regenerate tetrahydrofolate. However, there is a
considerable amount of catabolism of folate (6) and a small loss of folate via excretion from
the urine, skin, and bile. There is a need to replenish the body’s folate content by uptake from
the diet. If there is inadequate dietary folate, the activity of both the DNA and the methylation
cycles will be reduced. A decrease in the former will reduce DNA biosynthesis and thereby
reduce cell division. Although this will be seen in all dividing cells, the deficiency will be
most obvious in cells that are rapidly dividing, for example, in a decrease in red cell
production, producing anaemia. Other cells derived from bone marrow also decrease, leading
to leucopenia and thrombocytopenia. Likewise there is a reduction in cell division in the
lining of the gut. Taken together, this reduction in the DNA cycle results in an increased
susceptibility to infection, a decrease in blood coagulation, and secondary malabsorption. In
folate deficiency, the flux through the methylation cycle is decreased but the DNA cycle may
be more sensitive. The most obvious expression of the decrease in the methylation cycle is an
elevation in plasma homo-cysteine. This is due to a decreased availability of new methyl
groups provided as 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, necessary for the remethylation of plasma
homo-cysteine. Previously it was believed that a rise in plasma homo-cysteine was nothing
more than a biochemical marker of possible folate deficiency. However, there is increasing
evidence that elevations in plasma homo-cysteine are implicated in the aetiology of
cardiovascular disease (7). This moderate elevation of plasma homo-cysteine occurs in
subjects with a folate status previously considered adequate (8).
Interruption of the methylation cycle resulting from impaired folate status or deceased
vitamin B12 or vitamin B6 status may have serious long-term risks. Such interruption, as seen
in vitamin B12 deficiency (e.g., pernicious anaemia), causes a very characteristic
demyelination and neuropathy known as subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord
and peripheral nerves. If untreated, this leads to ataxia, paralysis, and ultimately death. Such
neuropathy is not usually associated with folate deficiency but is seen if folate deficiency is
very severe and prolonged (9). The explanation may lie in the well-established ability of nerve
tissue to concentrate folate to a level of about five times that in the plasma. This may ensure
that nerve tissue has an adequate level of folate when folate being provided to the rapidly
dividing cells of the marrow has been severely compromised for a prolonged period. The
resultant anaemia will thus inevitably present clinically earlier than the neuropathy.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
57
Definition of populations at risk for folate deficiency
Nutritional deficiency of folate is common in people consuming a limited diet (10). This can
be exacerbated by malabsorption conditions, including coeliac disease and tropical sprue.
Pregnant women are at risk of folate deficiency because pregnancy significantly increases the
folate requirement, especially during periods of rapid foetal growth (i.e., in the second and
third trimester) (6). During lactation losses of folate in milk also increase the folate
requirement.
During pregnancy there is an increased risk of foetal neural tube defects (NTDs), with risk
increasing 10-fold as folate status goes from adequate to poor (11). Between days 21 and 27
post-conception, the neural plate closes to form what will eventually be the spinal cord and
cranium. Spina bifida, anencephaly, and other similar conditions are collectively called NTDs.
They result from improper closure of the spinal cord and cranium, respectively, and are the
most common congenital abnormalities (12).
Delineation of dietary sources
Although folate is found in a wide variety of foods, it is present in a relatively low density (10)
except in liver. Diets that contain adequate amounts of fresh green vegetables (i.e., in excess
of three servings per day) will be good folate sources. Folate losses during harvesting, storage,
distribution, and cooking can be considerable. Likewise, folate derived from animal products
is subject to loss during cooking. Some staples, such as white rice and unfortified corn, are
low in folate (see Chapter 2).
In view of the increased requirement for folate during pregnancy and lactation and by
select population groups and in view of its low bio-availability, it may be necessary to
consider fortification of foods or selected supplementation of women of child-bearing years.
Evidence on which to base a recommended intake 
The 1988 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and World Health
Organization (FAO/WHO) Expert Consultation report (13) indicated that there were three
states of folate nutrition: folate adequacy, impending folate deficiency, and overt folate
deficiency. This represented the thinking at the time with respect to folate status – that a status
necessary to prevent clinical deficiency was clearly present with folate adequacy and that
further improvement in folate status would have no benefit. It would thus be appropriate to
increase intake in those with impending folate deficiency or more importantly in those with
overt folate deficiency but that nothing was to be gained by increasing the status of those who
had adequate status. In the 1988 FAO/WHO report (13) it was suggested that adequate folate
status is reflected in a red cell folate level of greater than 150 µg/L. Of less relevance was a
liver folate level of greater than 7.5 µg/g, because such values are only available in rare
circumstances. A normal N-formino-L-glutamate test was also cited as evidence of sufficiency,
but this test has largely been discredited and abandoned as not having any useful function (10).
In more recent literature red cell folate continues to be used as an important index of folate
status (14). Plasma folate is also used but is subject to greater fluctuation. Indicators of
haematologic status such as raised mean corpuscular volume, hypersegmentation of
neutrophils, and, eventually, the first stages of anaemia remain important indicators of reduced
folate status (15).
The biomarker plasma homo-cysteine is a very sensitive indicator of folate status and
must be added to the indicators of folate adequacy. This applies not only to the deficient range
of red blood cell folate but includes normal and even above-normal levels of red cell folate
(14). There is also very strong evidence that plasma homo-cysteine is an independent risk
58                                                                                               Chapter 4: Folate and folic acid
factor for cardiovascular disease (8, 16). Any elevation in homo-cysteine, even at levels
where overt folate deficiency is not an issue, may be undesirable because it is a risk factor for
chronic disease. Thus, newer thinking would require consideration of a folate intake that
would reduce plasma homo-cysteine to a minimum level of less than 7.0 µmol/l. Formerly
acceptable levels of red cell folate may therefore be associated with an increased rise of
cardiovascular disease and stroke (17,18). The possible benefit of lowering plasma homo-
cysteine through increased folate intake can be proven only by an intervention trial with folic
acid supplementation in large populations. Using plasma homo-cysteine as a biomarker for
folate adequacy can only be done on an individual basis after the possibility of a genetic
mutation or an inadequate supply of vitamin B6 or vitamin B12 has been eliminated.
There is now conclusive evidence that most NTDs can be prevented by the ingestion
of folic acid near the time of conception (11,12). Lower red cell folate, including what was
previously considered an adequate or normal range, is associated with an increased risk of
spina bifida and other NTDs (19). Red cell folate levels greater than 150 µg/L, which are
completely adequate to prevent anaemia, are associated with increase risk of NTDs (11).
Low folate status, including red cell levels in the normal range, increases the risk of
colorectal cancer (20, 21).
In 1998, the US National Academy of Sciences (22) exhaustively reviewed the
evidence of folate intake, status, and health for all age groups and also reviewed the literature
on the extra requirements during pregnancy and lactation. This review led to calculations of
an estimated average requirement (EAR) and a subsequent estimation of the recommended
dietary allowances (RDAs) to be the EAR plus 2 standard deviations. This definition of the
RDA agrees with the definition of the FAO/WHO recommended nutrient intake (RNI), and
members of this FAO/WHO expert group agreed that the values published by the US National
Academy of Sciences were the best estimates of folate requirements based on the current
literature. Therefore, the FAO/WHO expert group adopted the same approach, and the RNIs
suggested in Table 13 were based on the RDAs of the US National Academy of Sciences.
These recommendations apply to healthy individuals and populations.
Table 13
Estimated average requirement (EAR) and recommended nutrient intake (RNI) for
folic acid expressed as dietary folate equivalents, by age group
Group
EAR (µg/day)
RNI (µg/day)
Infants and children   
    0–6 months a
65
80
    7–12 months
65
80
    1–3 years
    4–6 years
120
160
160
200
    7–9 years
250
300
Adolescents, 10–18 years
300
400
Adults
    19–65 years
320
400
    65+ years
320
400
Pregnancy
520
600
Lactation
450
500
  Adapted from the US National Academy of Sciences (22). 
a Based on a human milk intake of 0.75 l/day.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
59
Differences in bio-availability of folic acid and food folate
The RNIs suggested for groups in Table 13 used food folate as the source of dietary folate
because most societies in developing countries consume folate from naturally occurring
sources. As discussed in the introduction, natural folates are found in a conjugated form in
food, which reduces its bio-availability by perhaps as much as 50 percent (4). In addition,
natural folates are much less stable. If chemically pure folic acid (pteroyl monoglutamate) is
used to provide part of the RNI, by way of fortification or supplementation, the total dietary
folate, which contains conjugated forms (pteroyl polyglutamates), could be reduced by an
appropriate amount. On average the conjugated folate in natural foods is considered to be only
half as available as synthetic folic acid. For example, the recommendation of usual mixed
forms of folate in the diet is 400 µg/day, but 100 µg of this given as pure folic acid would be
considered to be equivalent to 200 µg of dietary mixed folate. Hence, only an additional 200
µg of dietary folate would be needed.
The FAO/WHO expert group agreed with the findings of the Food and Nutrition
Board of the US National Academy of Sciences (22):
Since folic acid taken with food is 85 percent bio-available but food folate is only
about 50 percent bio-available, folic acid taken with food is 85/50 (i.e., 1.7) times
more available. Thus, if a mixture of synthetic folic acid plus food folate has been
fed, dietary folate equivalents (DFEs) are calculated as follows to determine the
EAR:
µg of DFE provided = [µg of food folate + (1.7 x µg of synthetic folic acid)]
To be comparable to food folate, only half as much folic acid is needed if taken on
an empty stomach, i.e., 1 µg of DFE = 1 µg of food folate = 0.5 µg of folic acid
taken on an empty stomach = 0.6 µg of folic acid with meals (22).
The experts from the National Academy of Sciences went on to say that the required
estimates for the dietary folate equivalents could be lowered if future research indicates that
food folate is more than 50 percent bio-available.
Neural tube defects
It is now agreed that a supplement of 400 µg of folic acid taken near the time of conception
will prevent most neural tube defects (NTDs) (23, 24). The recommendation to prevent
recurrence in women with a previous NTD birth remains 4.0 mg/day because of the high
increase in risk in such cases and because that was the amount used in the most definitive trial
(25). Because of the poorer bio-availability and stability of food folate, a diet based on food
folate will not be optimum in prevention. One study determined that risk of NTD is 10-fold
higher in people with poor folate status than in those with high normal folate status (11). A
further study suggests that an extra 200 µg/day or possibly 100 µg/day if taken habitually in
fortified food would prevent most if not all of folate-preventable NTDs (26). Ideally, an extra
400 µg/day should be provided because this is the amount used in various intervention trials
(12) and can be achieved by supplementation. This amount could not be introduced by way of
fortification, because exposure to high intakes of folic acid by people consuming a large intake
of flour would run the risk of preventing the diagnosis of pernicious anaemia in the elderly. It
is likely that depending on the staple chosen it would be possible to increase intake in most
women by 100 µg/day without causing too high an exposure in other groups. It is suggested
that this amount, although not optimal, will prevent most NTDs.
60                                                                                               Chapter 4: Folate and folic acid
Cardiovascular disease
Plasma homo-cysteine concentration, if only moderately elevated, is an independent risk
factor for cardiovascular disease (7, 8, 16) and stroke (18). Increased risk was associated with
values higher than 11 µmol/l (8), which is well within what is the normal range (5–15 µmol/l)
of plasma homo-cysteine levels (27). In addition, even in populations that are apparently
normal and consuming diets adequate in folate, there is a range of elevation of plasma homo-
cysteine (14) that could be lowered by an extra 100 or 200 µg/day of folic acid (8, 27). Large-
scale intervention trials regarding the significance of interrelationships among folate levels,
plasma homo-cysteine levels, and cardiovascular disease have not been completed and
therefore it would be premature to introduce public health measures in this area.
Colorectal cancer
Evidence suggests a link between colorectal cancer and dietary folate intake and folate status
(20, 21). One study reported that women who take multivitamin supplements containing folic
acid for prolonged periods have a significantly reduced risk of colorectal cancer (28).
However, the scientific evidence is not sufficiently clear for recommending increased folate
intake in populations at risk for colorectal cancer.
Upper limit
There is no evidence that it is possible to consume sufficient natural folate to pose a risk of
toxicity (22). However, this clearly does not apply to folic acid given in supplements or
fortified foods. The main concern is the masking of the diagnosis of pernicious anaemia,
because high levels of folic acid correct the anaemia, allowing the neuropathy to progress
undiagnosed to where it may become irreversible even upon treatment with vitamin B12 (1,
29). Consumption of large amounts of folic acid might also pose other less well-defined risks.
Certainly, consumption of milligram amounts of folic acid would be undesirable. Savage and
Lindenbaum (30) suggest that even at levels of the RNI there is a decreased opportunity to
diagnose pernicious anaemia through its presentation via the anaemia.
The US National Academy of Sciences (22), after reviewing literature, has suggested
an upper level of 1000 µg. Thus, 400 µg/day of folic acid, in addition to dietary folate, would
seem safe. There is probably no great risk of toxicity at a range between 400 and 1000 µg of
folic acid per day with the exception of some increased difficulty in diagnosing pernicious
anaemia resulting from the masking of the anaemia.
Future research
There are many areas for future research:
• Folate status may be related to birth weight. Therefore it is important to study the
relationship between folate status and birth weight, especially in populations where
low birth weight is prevalent. 
• Folate status probably differs widely in different developing countries. Red cell folate
levels are an excellent determinant of status. Such estimates in representative
populations would determine whether some communities are at risk from poor folate
status.
• Some evidence indicates that elevated plasma homo-cysteine is a risk factor for
cardiovascular disease and stroke. Elevated plasma homo-cysteine is largely related to
poor folate status, with poor vitamin B6 status, poor vitamin B12 status, or both also
contributing. There are also genetic differences (31). The prevalence of elevated
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
61
plasma homo-cysteine and its relationship to cardiovascular disease should be
established in different developing countries.
• More data should be generated on the bio-availability of natural folate from diets
consumed in developing countries.
• Because the absorption of folate may be more efficient in humans with folate
deficiency, folate absorption in these populations requires additional research.
• The relationship between folate deficiency and the incidence of NTDs in developing
countries needs further investigation.
• Quantitation of the folate content of foods typically consumed in developing countries
should be established for the different regions of the world.
62                                                                                               Chapter 4: Folate and folic acid
1. Scott, J.M. & Weir, D.G. 1994. Folate/vitamin B12 interrelationships. Essays in
Biochemistry, 28: 63-72. 
2. Blakley, R. 1969. The biochemistry of folic acid and related pteridines. North Holland
Research Monographs Frontiers of Biology. Vol. 13, Editors H. Newbergen and E.L.
Taton. Amsterdam. North Holland Publishing Company.
3. Kelly, P., McPartlin, J., Goggins, S., Weir, D.G. & Scott J.M. 1997. Unmetabolised
folic acid in serum: acute studies in subjects consuming fortified food and supplements.
Amer. J. Clin Nut., 69:1790-1795.
4. Gregory, J.F. 1997. Bio-availability of folate. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 51: 554-559.
5. Cuskelly, C.J., McNulty, H. & Scott, J.M. 1996. Effect of increasing dietary folate on
red-cell folate: implications for prevention of neural tube defects. Lancet, 347:657-659.
6. McPartlin, J., Halligan, A., Scott, J.M., Darling, M. & Weir, D.G. 1993 Accelerated
folate breakdown in pregnancy. Lancet, 341:148-149.
7. Scott, J.M. & Weir , D.G. 1996. Homo-cysteine and cardiovascular disease. Q. J. Med.,
89: 561-563.
8. Wald, N.J., Watt, H.C., Law, M.R., Weir, D.G., McPartlin, J. & Scott, J.M. 1998.
Homo-cysteine and ischaemic heart disease: results of a prospective study with
implications on prevention. Arch. Internal Med., 158: 862-867. 
9. Manzoor, M. & Runcie J. 1976. Folate-responsive neuropathy: report of 10 cases. BMJ,
1: 1176-1178. 
10. Chanarin, I. 1979. The Megaloblastic Anaemias 2nd Edition Blackwell Scientific
Publications Oxford.
11. Daly, L.E., Kirke, P.M., Molloy, A., Weir, D.G. & Scott, J.M. 1995. Folate levels and
neural tube defects. Implications for prevention. JAMA, 274: 1698-1702.
12. Scott, J.M., Kirke, P., Molloy, A.M., Daly, L. & Weir, D. 1994. The role of folate in the
prevention of neural tube defects Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53: 631-636.
13. FAO/WHO. FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. 1988. Requirements of Vitamin A, Iron,
Folate and Vitamin B12.  p. 51-61.  Rome, FAO.
14. Sauberlich, H. 1995. Folate status in the US Population groups. Folate in Health and
Disease. Lynn Bailey editor p. 171-194 Marcel Dekker, New York. 
15. Lindenbaum, J., Savage, D.G., Stabler S.P. & Allen, R.H. 1990. Diagnosis of
cobalamin deficiency : II. Relative sensitivities of serum cobalamin, methylmalonic acid,
and total homo-cysteine concentrations. Am. J. Haematol., 34: 99-107. 
16. Boushey, C.J. Beresford S.A., Omenn, G.S. & Motulsky A.G. 1995. A quantitative
assessment of plasma homo-cysteine as a risk factor for vascular disease. JAMA, 274:
1049-1057.
17. Selhub, J., Jacques, P.F., Wilson, P.W.F., Rush, D. & Rosenberg, I.H. 1993. Vitamin
status and intake as primary determinants of homo-cysteinemia in an elderly population.
JAMA, 270: 2693-2698.
18. Perry, I.J., Refsum, H., Morrise, R.W., Ebrahim, S.B., Ueland, P.M. & Shaper, A.C.
1995. Prospective study of serum total homo-cysteine concentrations and risk of stroke in
a middle aged British men. Lancet, 346: 1395-1398.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
63
19. Kirke, P.M., Molloy, A.M., Daly, L.E., Burke, H., Weir, D.G. & Scott, J.M. 1993.
Maternal plasma folate and vitamin B12 are independent risk factors for neural tube
defects. Q. J. Med., 86: 703-708.
20. Mason, J.B. 1995. Folate status: Effect on carcinogenesis. In: Bailey L.B. editor Folate in
Health and Disease. p. 361-378. New York, Marcel Dekker, 
21. Kim, Y.I., Fowaz, K., Knox, T., Lee, Y., Norton, R., Arora, S. Paiva, L. &  Mason,
J.B. 1998. Colonic mucosal concentrations of folate correlate well with blood
measurements of folate in persons with colorectal polyps. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68: 866-872. 
22. National Academy of Sciences. 1998. Dietary Reference Intakes: Folate, other B
Vitamins and Choline. Wasington, D.C., National Academy Press.
23. UK Dept of Health. 1992. Folic Acid and the Prevention of Neural Tube Defects. Report
from an Expert Advisory Group. H.M. Stationary Office.
24. Centers for Disease Control. 1992. Recommendations for the use of folic acid to reduce
the number of cases of spina bifida and other neural tube defects. MMWR, 41: 1-7.(No.
RR-14). 
25. MRC Vitamin Study Research Group. 1991. Prevention of neural tube defects: results
of the Medical Research Council Vitamin Study. Lancet, 338: 131-137. 
26. Daly, S., Mills J.L, Molloy, A.M., Conley, M.L., Lee, Y.J., Kirke, P.N., Weir, D.G. &
Scott, J.M. 1997. Minimum effective dose of folic acid for food fortification to prevent
neural tube defects. Lancet 350: 1666-1669.
27. Refsum, H., Ueland, P.M., Bygard, M.D. & Vollset, S.E. 1998. Homo-cysteine and
Cardiovascular Disease. Annu. Rev. Med., 49: 31-62.
28. Giovannucci E., Stampfer M.J., Colditz G.A., Hunter D.J., Fuchs C., Rosen B.A.,
Speitzer F.F.  & Willett W.C. 1998. Multivitamin use, folate and colorectal cancer in
women in the Nurses’ Health Study. Ann. Internal Med., 129: 517-524.
29. Weir Donald G. & Scott John M. 1999. Vitamin B12 “Cobalamin’ In: Modern Nutrition
in Health and Disease, editors: Maurice A.Shils, James A.Olson, Moshe Shike,A,
Catharine Ross.  Ninth Edition, p. 477-458. Philadelphia,  Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins.
30. Savage, D.G. & Lindenbaum, J. 1995 Neurological complications of acquired
cobalamin deficiency : clinical aspects. In: Baillieres Clin Haematol. Megaloblastic
Anaemia Editor S.M. Wickramasinghe vol. 8, p. 657-678. London, Bailliere Tindall.
31. Whitehead, A.S., Gallagher. P., Mills J.L., Kirke P., Burke H., Molloy A.M., Weir,
D.G., 
Shields, 
D.C. 
& 
Scott 
J.M. 
1995 
A 
generic 
defect 
in 
5, 
10
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase in neural tube defects.  Q. J. Med., 88: 763-766.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 65
Role of vitamin B12 in human metabolic processes
A
lthough the nutritional literature still uses the term vitamin B12, a more specific name
for vitamin B12 is cobalamin. Vitamin B12 is the largest of the B complex vitamins,
with a molecular weight of over 1000. It consists of a corrin ring made up of four
pyrroles with cobalt at the center of the ring (1, 2).
There are several vitamin B12–dependent enzymes in bacteria and algae, but no species
of plants have the enzymes necessary for vitamin B12 synthesis. This fact has significant
implications for the dietary sources and availability of vitamin B12. In mammalian cells there
are only two vitamin B12–dependent enzymes (3). One of these enzymes, methionine
synthase, uses the chemical form of the vitamin which has a methyl group attached to the
cobalt and is called methylcobalamin (see Figure 7 in Chapter 4.). The other enzyme,
methylmalonyl CoA mutase, uses vitamin B12 with a 5’-adeoxyadenosyl moiety attached to
the cobalt and is called 5’-deoxyaldenosylcobalamin, or coenzyme B12. In nature there are two
other forms of vitamin B12: hydroxycobalamin and aquacobalamin, where hydroxyl and water
groups, respectively, are attached to the cobalt. The synthetic form of vitamin B12 found in
supplements and fortified foods is cyanocobalamin, which has cyanide attached to the cobalt.
These 
three 
forms 
of 
B12 
are 
enzymatically 
activated 
to 
the 
methyl- 
or
deoxyadenosylcobalamins in all mammalian cells.
Dietary sources and availability 
Most microorganisms, including bacteria and algae, synthesise vitamin B12, and they
constitute the only source of the vitamin (4). The vitamin B12 synthesised in microorganisms
enters the human food chain through incorporation into food of animal origin. In many
animals gastrointestinal fermentation supports the growth of these vitamin B12–synthesising
microorganisms, and subsequently the vitamin is absorbed and incorporated into the animal
tissues. This is particularly true for the liver, where vitamin B12 is stored in large
concentrations. Products from these herbivorous animals, such as milk, meat, and eggs,
constitute important dietary sources of the vitamin unless the animal is subsisting in one of
the many regions known to be geochemically deficient in cobalt (5). Milk from cows and
humans contains binders with very high affinity for vitamin B12, whether they hinder or
promote intestinal absorption is not entirely clear. Omnivores and carnivores, including
humans, derive dietary vitamin B12 from animal tissues or products (i.e., milk, butter, cheese,
eggs, meat, poultry, etc.). It appears that no significant amount of the required vitamin B12 by
humans is derived from microflora, although vegetable fermentation preparations have also
been reported as being possible sources of vitamin B12 (6).
Absorption
The absorption of vitamin B12 in humans is complex (1, 2). Vitamin B12 in food is bound to
proteins and is released from the proteins by the action of a high concentration of
hydrochloric acid present in the stomach. This process results in the free form of the vitamin,
which is immediately bound to a mixture of glycoproteins secreted by the stomach and
salivary glands. These glycoproteins, called R-binders (or haptocorrins), protect vitamin B12
Chapter 5
Vitamin B12
66
Chapter 5: Vitamin B12
from chemical denaturation in the stomach. The stomach’s parietal cells, which secrete
hydrochloric acid, also secrete a glycoprotein called intrinsic factor. Intrinsic factor binds
vitamin B12 and ultimately enables its active absorption. Although the formation of the
vitamin B12 – intrinsic factor complex was initially thought to happen in the stomach, it is now
clear that this is not the case. At an acidic pH the affinity of the intrinsic factor for vitamin B12
is low whereas its affinity for the R-binders is high. When the contents of the stomach enter
the duodenum, the R-binders become partly digested by the pancreatic proteases, which
causes them to release their vitamin B12. Because the pH in the duodenum is more neutral
than that in the stomach, the intrinsic factor has a high binding affinity to vitamin B12, and it
quickly binds the vitamin as it is released from the R-binders. The vitamin B12–intrinsic factor
complex then proceeds to the lower end of the small intestine, where it is absorbed by
phagocytosis by specific ileal receptors (1, 2).
Populations at risk for and consequences of vitamin B12 deficiency
Vegetarians
Because plants do not synthesise vitamin B12, individuals who consume diets completely free
of animal products (vegan diets) are at risk of vitamin B12 deficiency. This is not true of lacto-
ovo-vegetarians, who consume the vitamin in eggs, milk, and other dairy products.
Pernicious anaemia
Malabsorption of vitamin B12 can occur at several points during digestion (1, 4). By far the
most important condition resulting in vitamin B12 malabsorption is the auto-immune disease
called pernicious anaemia (PA). In most cases of PA, antibodies are produced against the
parietal cells causing them to atrophy, lose their ability to produce intrinsic factor, and secrete
hydrochloric acid. In some forms of PA the parietal cells remain intact but auto-antiobodies
are produced against the intrinsic factor itself and attach to it, thus preventing it from binding
vitamin B12. In another less common form of PA, the antibodies allow vitamin B12 to bind to
the intrinsic factor but prevent the absorption of the intrinsic factor–vitamin B12 complex by
the ileal receptors. As is the case with most auto-immune diseases, the incidence of PA
increases markedly with age. In most ethnic groups it is virtually unknown to occur before the
age of 50, with a progressive rise in incidence thereafter (4). However, African American
populations are known to have an earlier age of presentation (4). In addition to causing
malabsorption of dietary vitamin B12, PA also results in an inability to reabsorb the vitamin
B12 which is secreted in the bile. Biliary secretion of vitamin B12 is estimated to be between
0.3 and 0.5 µg/day. Interruption of this so-called enterohepatic circulation of vitamin B12
causes the body to go into a significant negative balance for the vitamin. Although the body
typically has sufficient vitamin B12 stores to last 3–5 years, once PA has been established the
lack of absorption of new vitamin B12 is compounded by the loss of the vitamin because of
negative balance. When the stores have been depleted, the final stages of deficiency are often
quite rapid, resulting in death in a period of months if left untreated.
Atrophic gastritis
Historically, PA was considered to be the major cause of vitamin B12 deficiency, but it was a
fairly rare condition, perhaps affecting 1 percent to a few percent of elderly populations. More
recently it has been suggested that a far more common problem is that of hypochlorhydria
associated with atrophic gastritis, where there is a progressive reduction with age of the ability
of the parietal cells to secrete hydrochloric acid (7). It is claimed that perhaps up to one-
quarter of elderly subjects could have various degrees of hypochlorhydria as a result of
atrophic gastritis. It has also been suggested that bacterial overgrowth in the stomach and
intestine in individuals suffering from atrophic gastritis may also reduce vitamin B12
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 67
absorption. This absence of acid is postulated to prevent the release of protein-bound vitamin
B12 contained in food but not to interfere with the absorption of the free vitamin B12 found in
fortified foods or supplements. Atrophic gastritis does not prevent the reabsorption of bilary
vitamin B12 and therefore does not result in the negative balance seen in individuals with PA.
However, it is agreed that with time, a reduction in the amount of vitamin B12 absorbed from
the diet will eventually deplete even the usually adequate vitamin B12 stores, resulting in overt
deficiency.
When considering recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) for vitamin B12 for the
elderly, it is important to take into account the absorption of vitamin B12 from sources such as
fortified foods or supplements as compared with dietary vitamin B12. In the latter instances, it
is clear that absorption of intakes of less than 1.5–2.0 µg/day is complete – that is, for intakes
of less than 1.5–2.0 µg of free vitamin B12, the intrinsic factor – mediated system absorbs all
of that amount. It is probable that this is also true of vitamin B12 in fortified foods, although
this has not specifically been examined. However, absorption of food-bound vitamin B12 has
been reported to vary from 9 percent to 60 percent depending on the study and the source of
the vitamin, which is perhaps related to its incomplete release from food (8). This has led
many to estimate absorption as being up to 50 percent to correct for bio-availability of
absorption from food.
Vitamin B12 interaction with folate or folic acid
One of the vitamin B12 – dependent enzymes, methionine synthase, functions in one of the
two folate cycles (see Chapter 4) – the methylation cycle. This cycle is necessary to maintain
availability of the methyl donor S-adenosylmethionine; interruption reduces the wide range of
methylated products. One such important methylation is that of myelin basic protein.
Reductions in the level of S-adenosylmethionine seen in PA and other causes of vitamin B12
deficiency produce demyelination of the peripheral nerves and the spinal column, called sub-
acute combined degeneration (1, 2). This neuropathy is one of the main presenting conditions
in PA. The other principal presenting condition in PA is a megaloblastic anaemia
morphologically identical to that seen in folate deficiency. Disruption of the methylation cycle
should cause a lack of DNA biosynthesis and anaemia.
The methyl trap hypothesis is based on the fact that once the cofactor 5,10-
methylenetetrahydrofolate is reduced by its reductase to form 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, the
reverse reaction cannot occur. This suggests that the only way for the methyltetrahydrofolate
to be recycled to tetrahydrofolate, and thus to participate in DNA biosynthesis and cell
division, is through the vitamin B12 – dependent enzyme methionine synthase. When the
activity of this synthase is compromised, as it would be in PA, the cellular folate will become
progressively trapped as 5-methyltetrahydrofolate. This will result in a cellular pseudo folate
deficiency where despite adequate amounts of folate an anaemia will develop that is identical
to that seen in true folate deficiency. Clinical symptoms of PA, therefore, include neuropathy,
anaemia, or both. Treatment with vitamin B12, if given intramuscularly, will reactivate
methionine synthase, allowing myelination to restart. The trapped folate will be released and
DNA synthesis and generation of red cells will cure the anaemia. Treatment with high
concentrations of folic acid will treat the anaemia but not the neuropathy of PA. It should be
stressed that the so-called masking of the anaemia of PA is generally agreed not to occur at
concentrations of folate found in food or at intakes of the synthetic form of folic acid found at
usual RNI levels of 200 or 400 µg/day (1). However, there is some evidence that amounts less
than 400 µg may cause a haematologic response and thus potentially treat the anaemia (9).
The masking of the anaemia definitely occurs at high concentrations of folic acid (>1000
µg/day). This becomes a concern when considering fortification with synthetic folic acid of a
dietary staple such as flour (see Chapter 4).
68
Chapter 5: Vitamin B12
In humans the vitamin B12 – dependent enzyme methylmalonyl coenzyme A (CoA)
mutase functions in the metabolism of propionate and certain of the amino acids, converting
them into succinyl CoA, and in their subsequent metabolism via the citric acid cycle. It is
clear that in vitamin B12 deficiency the activity of the mutase is compromised, resulting in
high plasma or urine concentrations of methylmalonic acid (MMA), a degradation product of
methylmalonyl CoA. In adults this mutase does not appear to have any vital function, but it
clearly has an important role during embryonic life and in early development. Children
deficient in this enzyme, through rare genetic mutations, suffer from mental retardation and
other developmental defects.
Assessment of vitamin  B12  status 
Traditionally it was thought that low vitamin B12 status was accompanied by a low serum or
plasma vitamin B12 level (4). Recently this has been challenged by Lindenbaum et al.(10),
who suggested that a proportion of people with normal vitamin B12 levels are in fact vitamin
B12 deficient. They also suggested that elevation of plasma homo-cysteine and plasma MMA
are more sensitive indicators of vitamin B12 status. Although plasma homo-cysteine may also
be elevated because of folate or vitamin B6 deficiency, elevation of MMA apparently always
occurs with poor vitamin B12 status. There may be other reasons why MMA is elevated, such
as renal insufficiency, so the elevation of itself is not diagnostic. Many would feel that low or
decreased plasma vitamin B12 levels should be the first indication of poor status and that this
could be confirmed by an elevated MMA if this assay was available.
Evidence on which to base a recommended intake
Recommendations for nutrient intake
The Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Institute of
Medicine (8) has recently exhaustively reviewed the evidence of intake, status, and health for
all age groups and during pregnancy and lactation. This review has lead to calculations of
what they have called an estimated average requirement (EAR). The EAR is defined by NAS
as “the daily intake value that is estimated to meet the requirement, as defined by the specific
indicator of adequacy, in half of the individuals in a life-stage or gender group” (8). They
have estimated the recommended dietary allowances to be this figure plus 2 standard
deviations (SDs). Some members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Expert Consultation were involved in
the preparation and review of the NAS recommendations and judge them to have been the
best estimates based on available scientific literature. The FAO/WHO expert group felt it
appropriate to adopt the same approach used by the NAS in deriving the RNIs. Therefore the
RNIs suggested in Table 14 are based on the NAS EARs plus 2 SDs.
Adults 
Several lines of evidence point to an adult average requirement of about 2.0 µg/day. The
amount of intramuscular vitamin B12 needed to maintain remission in people with PA
suggests a requirement of about 1.5 µg/day (10), but they would also be losing 0.3–0.5µg/day
through interruption of their enterohepatic circulation, which is not typical. This might
suggest a requirement of 0.7–1.0 µg/day. Because vitamin B12 is not completely absorbed
from food, an adjustment of 50 percent has to be added giving a range of 1.4–2.0 µg/day (4).
Therapeutic response to ingested food vitamin B12 suggests a minimum requirement of
something less than 1.0 µg/day (8). Diets containing 1.8 µg/day seemed to maintain adequate
status but lower intakes showed some signs of deficiency. (8). Dietary intakes of less than 1.5
µg/day were reported to be inadequate in some subjects (11).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 69
In summary, the average requirement could be said to be 2 µg/day (8). The variability
of the requirements for vitamin B12 is accounted for by adding two SDs, that is, 2.4 µg/day as
an RNI for adults, including the elderly.
Table 14
Estimated average requirement (EAR) and recommended nutrient intake (RNI)
for vitamin B12, by age group
Adapted from the US National Academy of Sciences (8).
Group
EAR
µg/day
RNI
µg/day
Infants and children   
    0–6 months 
0.32
0.4
    7–12 months
0.32
0.5
    1–3 years
    4–6 years
0.7
1.0
0.9
1.2
    7–9 years
1.5
1.8
Adolescents, 10–18 years
2.0
2.4
Adults
    19–65 years
2.0
2.4
    65+ years
2.0
2.4
Pregnancy
2.2
2.6
Lactation
2.4
2.8
Children
The Food and Nutrition Board of the NAS Institute of Medicine (8) suggested the same
intakes for adolescents with progressive reduction of intake for younger groups.
Pregnancy
The previous FAO/WHO (12) Expert Consultation suggested that 0.1–0.2 µg/day of vitamin
B12 is transferred to the foetus (13) during the last two trimesters of pregnancy. On the basis
of on foetal liver content from post-mortem samples (14, 15, 16), there is further evidence that
the foetus accumulates on average 0.1–0.2 µg/day during pregnancies of women with diets
which have adequate vitamin B12. It has been reported that children born to vegetarians or
other women with a low vitamin B12 intake subsequently develop signs of clinical vitamin B12
deficiency such as neuropathy (17). Therefore, when calculating the EAR for pregnant
women, 0.2 µg/day of vitamin B12 is added to the EAR for adults to result in an EAR of 2.2
µg/day and an RNI of 2.6 µg /day during pregnancy.
Lactation 
It is estimated that 0.4 µg/day of vitamin B12 is found in the human milk of women with
adequate vitamin B12 status (8). Therefore an extra 0.4 µg/day of vitamin B12 is needed during
lactation in addition to the normal adult requirement of 2.0 µg/day, giving a total EAR of 2.4
µg/day during lactation and an RNI of 2.8 µg/day.
Infants 
As with other nutrients, the principal way to determine requirements of infants is to examine
the levels in milk from mothers on adequate diets. There is a wide difference in the vitamin
70
Chapter 5: Vitamin B12
B12 values reported in human milk because of differences in methodology. The previous
FAO/WHO report (12) used milk vitamin B12 values of normal women of about 0.4 µg/l. For
an average milk production of 0.75 l/day,  the vitamin B12 intake by infants would be 0.3
µg/day (18). Other studies have reported ranges of vitamin B12 in human milk to be 0.4–0.8
µg/L (17, 19, 20, 21, 22). Although daily intakes ranging from 0.02 to 0.05 µg/day have been
found to prevent deficiency (23, 24), these intakes are totally inadequate for long-term health.
An EAR of 0.3–0.6 µg/day would result in an RNI of 0.36–0.72 µg/d. It might be prudent to
use the lower figure of 0.4 µg/day for the first 6 months of pregnancy and 0.7 µg/day for last
trimester.
Upper limits
The absorption of vitamin B12 mediated by intrinsic factor is limited to 1.5–2.0 µg per meal
because of the limited capacity of the receptors. In addition, between 1 percent and 3 percent
of any particular oral administration of vitamin B12 is absorbed by passive diffusion. Thus, if
1000 µg vitamin B12 (sometimes used to treat those with PA) is taken orally, the amount
absorbed would be 2.0 µg by active absorption plus about 30 µg by passive diffusion. This
amount has never been reported to have any side effects (8). Similar large amounts have been
used in some preparations of nutritional supplements without apparent ill effects. However,
there are no established benefits for such amounts. Such high intakes thus represent no benefit
in those without malabsorption and should probably be avoided.
Future research
Because they do not consume any animal products, vegans are at risk of vitamin B12
deficiency. It is generally agreed that in some communities the only source of vitamin B12 is
from contamination of food by microorganisms. When vegans move to countries where
standards of hygiene are more stringent, there is good evidence that risk of vitamin B12
deficiency increases in adults and, particularly, in children born to and breast-fed by women
who are strict vegans.
• As standards of hygiene improve in developing countries, there is a concern that the
prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency might increase. This should be ascertained by
estimating plasma vitamin B12 levels, preferably in conjunction with plasma MMA levels
in representative adult populations and in infants.
• The contribution which fermented vegetable foods make to vitamin B12 status of vegan
communities should be investigated.
• The prevalence of atrophic gastritis should be investigated in developing countries.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 71
1. Weir, D.G. & Scott, J.M. 1999. Cobalamins Physiology, Dietary Sources and
Requirements. In: Sadler M.J., Strain J.J., Caballero B., eds. Encyclopedia of Human
Nutrition, 1: 394-401. 
2. Weir, D.G. & Scott, J.M. 1999. In: Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. Editors
Shils M.E., Olson J.A., Shike M., & Ross A.C. Baltimore, USA. Willams and Wilkins.
3. Scott, J.M. & Weir, D.G. 1994. Folate/vitamin B12 interrelationships. Essays in
Biochemistry, p.63-72.
4. Chanarin, I. 1979. The Megaloblastic Anaemia 2nd Edition. London. Blackwell
Scientific Oxford. 
5. Smith, R. & Cobalt, M. 1987. In: Trace Elements in Human and Animal Nutrition,
5th Edition. Ch. 5(editor: Mertz W.) p. 143-184. San Diego, Academic Press. 
6. Van den Berg, H., Dagnelie H. & van Staveren, W.A. 1998. Vitamin B12 and
seaweed. Lancet, 1: 242-243.
7. Carmel, R. 1996. Prevalence of undiagnosed pernicious anaemia in the elderly. Arch.
Intern. Med., 156: 1097-1100.
8. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine, National academy of Sciences.
1998.  Dietary reference intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6 , folate,
and vitamin B12, pantothenic aid, botin, and choline. National Academy Press
Washington DC, USA.
9. Savage, D.G. & Lindenbaum, J. 1995. Neurological complications of acquired
cobalamin deficiency: clinical aspects. In: Bailliere’s Clin. Haematol. Megaloblastic
Anaemia Editor S.M. Wickramasinghe Vol. 8, pp 657-678. London, Bailliere Tindall.
10. Lindenbaum, J., Savage, D.G., Stabler, S.P. & Allen, R.H. 1990.  Diagnosis of
cobalamin deficiency: II. Relative sensitivities of serum cobalamin, methylmalonic
acid, and total homo-cysteine concentrations. Am. J. Hematol., 34: 99-107.
11. Narayanan, M.M., Dawson, D.W. & Lewis, M.J. 1991. Dietary deficiency of
vitamin B12 in association with low serum cobalamin levels in non-vegetarians. Eur. J.
Hematol., 47: 115-118.
12. FAO/WHO. 1988. Requirements of Vitamin A, Iron, Folate and Vitamin B12. Report
of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation. p. 62-73. Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, Rome, Italy. 
13. Doscherholmen, A., McMahon, J. & Ripley, D. 1978. Vitamin B12 assimilation
from chicken meat. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 31: 825-830.
14. Baker, S.J., Jacob, E., Rajan, K.T. & Swaminathan, S.P. 1962. Vitamin B12
deficiency in pregnancy and the puerperium. BMJ, 1: 1658-1661.
15. Loria A., Vaz-Pinto A., Arroyo P. & Ramirez-Mateos C., Sanchez-Medal L. 1977.
Nutritional anemia. VI. Foetal hepatic storage of metabolites in the second half of
pregnancy. J. Pediatr.,  91: 569-573.
16. Vaz Pinto, A., Torras, V., Sandoval, J.F., Dillman, E., Mateos, C.R. & Cordova,
M.S. 1975. Folic acid and vitamin B12 determination in foetal liver. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
28: 1085-1086.
REFERENCES
72
Chapter 5: Vitamin B12
17. Specker, B.L., Black, A., Allen, L. &  Morrow, F. 1990. Vitamin B12: Low milk
concentrations are related to low serum concentrations in vegetarian women and to
methylmalonic aciduria in their infants. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 52: 1073-1076.
18. Collins, R.A., Harper, A.E., Schreiber, M. &  Elvehjen, C.A. 1951. The folic acid
and vitamin B12 content of the milk of various species. J. Nutr., 43: 313-321.
19. Donangelo, C.M., Trugo, N.M., Koury, J.C., Barreto, Silva M.I., Freitas, L.A.,
Feldheim, W. &  Barth, C.  1989. Iron, zinc, folate and vitamin B12 nutritional status
and milk composition of low income Brazilian mothers.  Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 43:
253-266. 
20. Dagnelie, P.C., van Staveren, W.A., Roos, A.H., Tuinstra, L.G. & Burema, J.
1992 Nutrients and contaminants in Human milk from mothers on macrobiotic and
omnivorous diets. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 46: 355-366. 
21. Trugo, N.M. & Sardinha, F. 1994. Cobalamin and cobalamin-binding capacity in
Human milk. Nutr. Res., 14: 22-33.
22. Ford,C., Rendle, M., Tracy, M., Richardson,V. &  Ford, H. 1996. Vitamin B12
levels in Human milk during the first nine months of lactation . Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res.,
66: 329-331.
23. Srikantia, S.G. & Reddy, V. (1967). Megaloblastic anaemia of infancy and vitamin
B12. Br. J. Haematol., 13: 949-953.
24. Roberts, P.D., James, H., Petric, A., Morgan, J.O. &  Hoffbrand, A.V. (1973)
Vitamin B12 status in pregnancy among immigrants in Britain. BMJ, iii: 67-72.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 73
V
itamin C (chemical names: ascorbic acid and ascorbate) is a six-carbon lactone which
is synthesised from glucose by many animals. Vitamin C is synthesised in the liver in
some mammals and in the kidney in birds and reptiles. However, several species –
including humans, non-human primates, guinea pigs, Indian fruit bats, and Nepalese red-
vented bulbuls – are unable to synthesise vitamin C. When there is insufficient vitamin C in
the diet, humans suffer from the potentially lethal deficiency disease scurvy (1). Humans and
primates lack the terminal enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway of ascorbic acid, l-
gulonolactone oxidase, because the gene encoding for the enzyme has undergone substantial
mutation so that no protein is produced (2).
Role in human metabolic processes
Background biochemistry
Vitamin C is an electron donor (reducing agent or antioxidant), and probably all of its
biochemical and molecular functions can be accounted for by this function. The potentially
protective role of vitamin C as an antioxidant is discussed in the antioxidants chapter of this
report.
Enzymatic functions
Vitamin C acts as an electron donor for 11 enzymes (3, 4). Three of those enzymes are found
in fungi but not in humans or other mammals (5, 6). They are involved in reutilisation
pathways for pyrimidines and the deoxyribose moiety of deoxynucleosides. Of the 8
remaining human enzymes, three participate in collagen hydroxylation (7-9) and two in
carnitine biosynthesis (10, 11); of the three enzymes which participate in collagen
hydroxylation, one is necessary for biosynthesis of the catecholamine norepinephrine (12, 13),
one is necessary for amidation of peptide hormones (14, 15), and one is involved in tyrosine
metabolism (4, 16).
Ascorbate interacts with enzymes having either monooxygenase or dioxygenase
activity. The monooxygenases dopamine β-monooxygenase and peptidyl-glycine α-
monooxygenase incorporate a single oxygen atom into a substrate, either a dopamine or a
glycine-terminating peptide. The remaining enzymes are dioxygenases which incorporate two
oxygen atoms in two different ways. The enzyme 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase
incorporates two oxygen atoms into one product. The other dioxygenase incorporates one
oxygen atom into succinate and one into the enzyme-specific substrate.
Miscellaneous functions
The concentrations of vitamin C in gastric juice were several fold higher (median, 249 µmol/l;
range, 43–909 µmol/l) than those found in the plasma of the same normal subjects (39 µmol/l,
14–101 µmol/l) (17). Gastric juice vitamin C may prevent the formation of N-nitroso
compounds, which are potentially mutagenic (18). High intakes of vitamin C correlate with
reduced gastric cancer risk (19), but a cause-and-effect relationship has not been established.
Chapter 6
Vitamin C
74
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
Vitamin C protects low-density lipoproteins ex vivo against oxidation and may function
similarly in the blood (20; see Chapter 17).
A common feature of vitamin C deficiency is anaemia. The antioxidant properties of
vitamin C may stabilise folate in food and in plasma, and increased excretion of oxidized
folate derivatives in human scurvy was reported (21). Vitamin C promotes absorption of
soluble non-haem iron possibly by chelation or simply by maintaining the iron in the reduced
(ferrous, Fe2+) form (22, 23). The effect can be achieved with the amounts of vitamin C
obtained in foods. However, the amount of dietary vitamin C required to increase iron
absorption ranges from 25 mg upwards and depends largely on the amount of inhibitors, such
as phytates and polyphenols, present in the meal (24). (See Chapter 13 on iron for further
discussion.)
Overview of significant scientific information 
From the 15th century, scurvy was dreaded by seamen and explorers forced to subsist for
months on diets of dried beef and biscuits. Scurvy was described by the Crusaders, during the
sieges of numerous European cities, and as a result of the famine in 19th century Ireland.
Three important manifestations of scurvy – gingival changes, pain in the extremities, and
haemorrhagic manifestations – preceded oedema, ulcerations, and ultimately death. Skeletal
and vascular lesions in scurvy probably arise from a failure of osteoid formation. In infantile
scurvy the changes are mainly at the sites of most active bone growth; characteristic signs are
a pseudoparalysis of the limbs caused by extreme pain on movement and caused by
haemorrhages under the periosteum, as well as swelling and haemorrhages in areas of the
gums surrounding erupting teeth (25). In adults one of the early, principle adverse effects of
the collagen-related pathology may be impaired wound healing (26). Vitamin C deficiency
can be detected from early signs of clinical deficiency, such as the follicular hyperkeratosis,
petechial haemorrhages, swollen or bleeding gums, and joint pain, or from the very low
concentrations of ascorbate in plasma, blood, or leukocytes. The Sheffield studies (26, 27) and
later studies in Iowa (28, 29) were the first major attempts made to quantify vitamin C
requirements. The studies indicated that the amount of vitamin C required to prevent or cure
early signs of deficiency was between 6.5 and 10 mg/day. This range represents the lowest
physiologic requirement. The Iowa studies (28, 29) and Kallner et al (30) established that at
tissue saturation, whole body vitamin C content is approximately 20 mg/kg, or 1500 mg, and
that during depletion vitamin C is lost at 3 percent of whole body content per day.
Clinical signs of scurvy appear in men at intakes lower than 10 mg/day (27) or when
the whole body content falls below 300 mg (28). Such intakes are associated with plasma
ascorbate concentrations below 11 µmol/l or leukocyte levels less than 2 nmol/108 cells.
However, the plasma concentrations fall to around 11 µmol/l when dietary vitamin C is
between 10 and 20 mg/day. At intakes greater than 25–35 mg/day, plasma concentrations start
to rise steeply, indicating a greater availability of vitamin C for metabolic needs. In general,
plasma ascorbate closely reflects the dietary intake and ranges between 20 and 80 µmol/l.
Note that during infection or physical trauma, an increase in the number of circulating
leukocytes occurs and these take up vitamin C from the plasma (31, 32). Therefore, both
plasma and leukocyte levels may not be very precise indicators of body content or status at
such times. However, leukocyte ascorbate remains a better indicator of vitamin C status than
plasma ascorbate most of the time and only in the period immediately after the onset of an
infection are both values unreliable.
Intestinal absorption of vitamin C is by an active, sodium-dependent, energy-
requiring, carrier-mediated transport mechanism (33) and as intakes increase, the tissues
progressively become more saturated. The physiologically efficient, renal-tubular
reabsorption mechanism retains vitamin C in the tissues up to a whole body content of
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 75
ascorbate of about 20 mg/kg body weight (30). However, under steady state conditions, as
intakes rise from around 100 mg/day there is an increase in urinary output in so that at 1000
mg/day almost all absorbed vitamin C is excreted (34, 35).
Definition of population at risk 
The populations at risk of vitamin C deficiency are those for whom the fruit and vegetable
supply is minimal. Epidemics of scurvy are associated with famine and war, when people are
forced to become refugees and food supply is small and irregular. Persons in whom the total
body vitamin C content is saturated can subsist without vitamin C for approximately 2 months
before the appearance of clinical signs, and as little as 6.5–10 mg/day vitamin C will prevent
the appearance of scurvy. In general, vitamin C status will reflect the regularity of fruit and
vegetable consumption but also socio-economic conditions, because intake is determined not
just by availability, but by cultural preferences and cost.
In Europe and the United States an adequate intake of vitamin C is indicated by the
results of various national surveys (36-38). In the United Kingdom and Germany, the mean
dietary intakes of vitamin C in adult men and women were 87 and 76 (37) and 75 and 72
mg/day (36), respectively. In addition, a recent survey of elderly men and women in the
United Kingdom reported vitamin C intakes of 72 (SD 61) and 68 (SD 60) mg/day,
respectively (39). In the United States, in the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (38), the median consumption of vitamin C from foods during the years 1988–91 was
73 and 84 mg/day in men and women, respectively. In all these studies there was a wide
variation in vitamin C intake and 25–30 percent of the US population consumed less than 2.5
servings of fruit and vegetables daily. Likewise a survey of Latin American children in the
United States suggested that less than 15 percent consumed the recommended intake of fruits
and vegetables (40). It is not possible to relate servings of fruits and vegetables to an exact
amount of vitamin C, but the World Health Organization (WHO) dietary goal of 400 g (41)
aimed to provide sufficient  vitamin C to meet the 1970 Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO)/WHO guidelines – that is, approximately 20–30 mg/day – and
lower the risk of chronic disease. The WHO goal has been roughly translated into the
recommendation of five portions per day (42).
Reports from India show that the available supply of vitamin C is 43 mg/capita/day,
and in the different states of India it ranges from 27 to 66 mg/day. In one study, low-income
children consumed as little as 8.2 mg/day of vitamin C in contrast to a well-to-do group of
children where the intake was 35.4 mg/day (43). Other studies done in developing countries
found plasma vitamin C concentrations lower than those reported for developed countries, for
example, 20–27 µmol/l for apparently healthy adolescent boys and girls in China and 3–54
µmol/l (median 14 µmol/l) for similarly aged Gambian nurses (44, 45), although values
obtained in a group of adults from a rural district in Northern Thailand were quite acceptable
(17–118 µmol/l, median 44 µmol/l) (46). However, it is difficult to assess the extent to which
sub-clinical infections are lowering the plasma vitamin C concentrations seen in such
countries.
Data describing a positive association between vitamin C consumption and health
status are frequently reported, but intervention studies do not support the observations. Low
plasma concentrations are reported in patients with diabetes (47) and infections (48) and in
smokers (49), but the relative contribution of diet and stress to these situations is uncertain
(see Chapter 17). Epidemiologic studies indicate that diets with a high vitamin C content
have been associated with lower cancer risk, especially for cancers of the oral cavity,
oesophagus, stomach, colon, and lung (39, 50-52). However, there appears to be no effect of
consumption of vitamin C supplements on the development of colorectal adenoma and
76
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
stomach cancer (52-54), and data on the effect of vitamin C supplementation on coronary
heart disease and cataract development are conflicting (55-74). Currently there is no
consistent evidence from population studies that heart disease, cancers, or cataract
development are specifically associated with vitamin C status. This of course does not
preclude the possibility that other components in vitamin C – rich fruits and vegetables
provide health benefits, but it is not yet possible to separate such an effect from other factors
such as lifestyle patterns of people who have a high vitamin C intake.
Dietary sources of vitamin C and limitations to vitamin C 
Ascorbate is found in many fruits and vegetables (75). Citrus fruits and juices are particularly
rich sources of vitamin C but other fruits including cantaloupe, honeydew melon, cherries,
kiwi fruits, mangoes, papaya, strawberries, tangelo, watermelon, and tomatoes also contain
variable amounts of vitamin C. Vegetables such as cabbage, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, bean
sprouts, cauliflower, kale, mustard greens, red and green peppers, peas, tomatoes, and
potatoes may be more important sources of vitamin C than fruits. This is particularly true
because the vegetable supply often extends for longer periods during the year than does the
fruit supply.
In many developing countries, limitations in the supply of vitamin C are often
determined by seasonal factors (i.e., the availability of water, time, and labour for the
management of household gardens and the short harvesting season of many fruits). For
example, mean monthly ascorbate intakes ranged from 0 to 115 mg/day in one Gambian
community in which peak intakes coincided with the seasonal duration of the mango crop and
to a lesser extent with orange and grapefruit harvests. These fluctuations in dietary ascorbate
intake were closely reflected by corresponding variations in plasma ascorbate (11.4–68.4
µmol/L) and human milk ascorbate (143–342 µmol/L) (76).
Vitamin C is also very labile, and the loss of vitamin C on boiling milk provides one
dramatic example of a cause of infantile scurvy. The vitamin C content of food is strongly
influenced by season, transport to market, shelf life, time of storage, cooking practices, and
chlorination of water. Cutting or bruising of produce releases ascorbate oxidase. Blanching
techniques inactivate the oxidase enzyme and help to preserve ascorbate as also will low pH,
as in the preparation of sauerkraut (pickled cabbage). In contrast, heating and exposure to
copper or iron or to mildly alkaline conditions destroys the vitamin, and too much water can
leach it from the tissues during cooking.
The use of citrus fruits by the British navy in the 18th century gave rise to the term
‘limey’, a colloquial term for British sailors. However, it is important to realise that the
amount of vitamin C in a food is usually not the major determinant of a food’s importance for
supply, but rather regularity of intake. For example, in countries where the potato is an
important staple food and refrigeration facilities are limited, seasonal variations in plasma
ascorbate are due to the considerable deterioration in the potato’s vitamin C content during
storage; the content can decrease from 30 to 8 mg/100 g over 8–9 months (77). Such data can
indicate the important contribution the potato can make to human vitamin C requirements
even though the potato vitamin C concentration is low.
An extensive study has been made of losses of vitamin C during the packaging,
storage, and cooking of blended foods (maize and soya-based relief foods). Data from a US
Agency for Internation Development programme show that vitamin C losses from packaging
and storage in polythene bags of such relief foods are much less significant than the 52–82
percent losses attributable to conventional cooking procedures (78).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 77
Information used to derive dietary requirement of vitamin C 
Calculating the dietary intake from the physiologic requirements 
Adults
At saturation the whole body content of ascorbate in adult males is approximately 20 mg/kg,
or 1500 mg. Clinical signs of scurvy appear when the whole body content falls below 300–
400 mg, and the last signs disappear when the body content reaches about 1000 mg (28, 30).
In these experiments, ascorbate in the whole body was catabolised at an approximate rate of 3
percent/day (2.9  percent/day, SD 0.6) (29).
There is a sigmoidal relationship between intake and plasma concentrations of vitamin
C (79). Below 30 mg/day, plasma concentrations are around 11 µmol/l. Above this intake,
plasma concentrations increase steeply to 60 µmol/l and plateau at around 80 µmol/l, which
represents the renal threshold. Under near steady state conditions, plateau concentrations of
vitamin C are achieved by intakes in excess of 200 mg/day (Figure 8) (34). At low doses
dietary vitamin C is almost completely absorbed, but over the range of usual dietary intakes
(30–180 mg/day), absorption may decrease to 75 percent because of competing factors in the
food (35, 80).
Figure 8
Relationship between intake and plasma concentrations of vitamin C
78
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
A body content of 900 mg falls half way between tissue saturation and the point at which
clinical signs of scurvy appear. Assuming an absorption efficiency of 85 percent, and a
catabolic rate of 2.9, the average intake of vitamin C can be calculated as:
900 x 2.9/100 x 100/85 = 30.7 mg/day, which can be rounded off to 30 mg/day.
The recommended nutrient intake (RNI) would therefore be:
900 x (2.9 + 1.2)/100 x 100/85 = 43.4 mg/day, which can be rounded off to 45
mg/day.
An RNI of 45 mg would achieve 50 percent saturation in the tissues in 97.5 percent of
adult males. An intake of 45 mg vitamin C will produce a plasma ascorbate concentrations
near the base of the steep slope of the diet-plasma dose response curve (Figure 8). No
turnover studies have been done in women, but from the smaller body size and whole body
content of women, requirements might be expected to be lower. However, in depletion studies
plasma concentrations fell more rapidly in women than in men (81). It would seem prudent,
therefore, to make the same recommendation for non-pregnant, non-lactating women as for
men. Thus, an intake of 45 mg/day will ensure that measurable amounts of ascorbate will be
present in the plasma of most people and will be available to supply tissue requirements for
metabolism or repair at sites of depletion or damage. A whole body content of around 900 mg
of vitamin C would provide at least 1 month’s safety interval, even for a zero intake, before
the body content falls to 300 mg (82).
The Sheffield (27) and Iowa studies (28) indicated that the minimum amount of
vitamin C needed to cure scurvy in men was less than 10 mg/day. This level however, is not
sufficient to provide measurable amounts of ascorbate in plasma and leukocyte cells, which
will remain low. As indicated above, no studies have been done on women and minimum
requirements to protect non-pregnant and non-lactating women against scurvy might be
slightly lower than in men. Although 10 mg/day will protect against scurvy, this amount
provides no safety margin against further losses. The mean requirement is therefore calculated
by interpolation between 10 and 45 mg/day, at an intake of 25–30 mg/day.
Pregnancy and lactation
During pregnancy there is a moderate extra drain on vitamin C, particularly during the last
trimester, and 8 mg/day of vitamin C is reported to be sufficient to prevent scorbutic signs in
infants aged 4–17 months (83). Therefore, the additional needs during pregnancy are unlikely
to be more, particularly during the last trimester. An extra 10 mg/day throughout pregnancy
should enable reserves to accumulate to meet the extra needs of the growing foetus in the last
trimester.
During lactation, however, 20 mg/day of vitamin C is secreted in milk. For an
assumed absorption efficiency of 85 percent, an extra 25 mg will be needed by the mother. It
is therefore recommended that the RNI should be set at 70 mg to fulfil the needs of both the
mother and infant during lactation.
Children 
As mentioned earlier, 8 mg/day of vitamin C is sufficient to prevent scorbutic signs in infants
(83). The vitamin C concentration in mature human milk is estimated to be 40 mg/l (mean,
SD 10) (84), but the amount of vitamin C in human milk appears to reflect maternal dietary
intake and not the infants needs (82, 83, 85). RNIs for infants aged 0–6 months are therefore
set, somewhat arbitrarily, at 25 mg/day, and the RNI is gradually increased as children got
older.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 79
Elderly 
Elderly people frequently have low plasma ascorbate values and intakes lower than those in
younger people, often because of problems of poor dentition or mobility (86). Elderly people
are also more likely to have underlying sub-clinical diseases, which can also influence plasma
ascorbate concentrations (see Chapter 17). It has been suggested, however, that the
requirements of elderly people do not differ substantially from those of younger people in the
absence of pathology, which may influence absorption or renal functioning (82). The RNIs for
the elderly are therefore the same as those for adults (45 mg/day).
Smokers
Kallner et al. (87) reported that the turnover of vitamin C in smokers was 50 percent greater
than that in non-smokers. However, there is no evidence that the health of smokers would be
influenced in any way by increasing their RNI. The panel therefore found no justification in
making a separate RNI for smokers.
Recommended nutrient intakes for vitamin C
Table 15  presents a summary of the above discussed RNIs for vitamin C by age groups.
Table 15
Recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) for vitamin C
Group
Infants and children 
   0–6 months
25
   7–12 months
30b
1–3 years
   4–6 years
7–9 years
35 b
Adolescents, 10–18 years
40 b
Adults
   19–65 years
   65+ years
45
45
Pregnancy
55
Lactation
70
a Amount required to half saturate body tissues with vitamin C in 97.5 percent of the 
population. Larger amounts may often be required to ensure an adequate absorption 
of non-haem iron. 
 b Arbitrary values.
Vitamin C toxicity
The potential toxicity of excessive doses of supplemental vitamin C relates to intra-intestinal
events and to the effects of metabolites in the urinary system. Intakes of 2–3 g/day of vitamin
C produce unpleasant diarrhoea from the osmotic effects of the unabsorbed vitamin in the
intestinal lumen in most people (88). Gastrointestinal disturbances can occur after ingestion of
as little as 1 g because approximately half of the amount would not be absorbed at this dose
(35).
Oxalate is an end product of ascorbate catabolism and plays an important role in
kidney stone formation. Excessive daily amounts of vitamin C produce hyperoxaluria. In four
volunteers who received vitamin C in the range of 5–10 g/day, this amounted to
RNI
mg/day a
30 b
30 b
80
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
approximately a doubling of urinary oxalate excretion, from 50 to 87 mg/day (range 60–126
mg/day) (89). However, the risk of oxalate stones formation may become significant at high
intakes of vitamin C (>1 g) (90), particularly in subjects with high amounts of urinary calcium
(89).
Vitamin C may precipitate haemolysis in some people, including those with glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (91), paroxysmal nocturnal haemaglobinuria (92), or
other conditions where increased risk of red cell haemolysis may occur or where protection
against the removal of the products of iron metabolism may be impaired, as in people with the
haptoglobin Hp2-2 phenotype (93). Of these conditions, only the haptoglobin Hp 2-2
condition was associated with abnormal vitamin C metabolism (lower plasma ascorbate than
expected) under conditions where intake of vitamin C was provided mainly from dietary
sources. Therefore, 1 g vitamin C appears to be the advisable upper limit of dietary intake.
Future research  
Research is needed to gain a better understanding of the following:
• functions of endogenous gastric ascorbate and its effect on iron absorption;
• functional measurements of vitamin C status which reflect the whole body content of
vitamin C and are not influenced by infection; and
• reasons for the vitamin C uptake by granulocytes, which is associated with infection.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 81
1. Stewart, C.P. & Guthrie, D. [Editors] (1953). Lind’s treatise on scurvy. Edinburgh,
University Press.
2. Nishikimi, M., Fukuyama, R., Minoshima, S., Shimizu, N. & Yagi, K. 1994. Cloning
and 
chromosomal 
mapping 
of 
the 
Human 
nonfunctional 
gene 
for
L-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase, the enzyme for L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis missing in
man. J. Biol. Chem., 269: 13685-13688.
3. Levine, M. 1986. New concepts in the biology and biochemistry of ascorbic acid. N.
Engl. J. Med., 314:892-902. 
4. Englard, S. & Seifter, S. 1986. The biochemical functions of ascorbic acid. Annu. Rev.
Nutr., 6: 365-406: 365-406. 
5. Wondrack, L.M., Hsu, C.A. & Abbott, M.T. 1978. Thymine 7-hydroxylase and
pyrimidine deoxyribonucleoside 2'-hydroxylase activities in Rhodotorula glutinis. J. Biol.
Chem., 253: 6511-6515. 
6. Stubbe, J.A. 1985. Identification of two alpha keto glutarate dependent dioxygenases in
extracts of Rhodotorula glutinis catalysing deoxyuridine hydroxylation. J. Biol. Chem.,
260: 9972-9975. 
7. Prockop, D.J. & Kivirikko, K.I. 1995. Collagens: molecular biology, diseases, and
potential for therapy. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 64: 403-434. 
8. Peterkofsky, B. 1991. Ascorbate requirement for hydroxylation and secretion of
procollagen: relationship to inhibition of collagen synthesis in scurvy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
54:1135S-1140S. 
9. Kivirikko, K.I. & Myllyla, R. 1985. Post-translational processing of procollagens. Ann.
NY Acad. Sci., 460: 187-201. 
10. Rebouche, C.J. 1991. Ascorbic acid and carnitine biosynthesis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54:
1147S-1152S. 
11. Dunn, W.A., Rettura, G., Seifter, E. & Englard, S. 1984. Carnitine biosynthesis from
gamma-butyrobetaine and from exogenous protein-bound 6-N-trimethyl-L-lysine by the
perfused guinea pig liver. Effect of ascorbate deficiency on the in situ activity of
gamma-butyrobetaine hydroxylase. J. Biol. Chem., 259: 10764-10770.
12. Levine, M., Dhariwal, K.R., Washko, P.W., Butlesr, J.D., Wang, Y.H. & Bergsten, P.
1991. Ascorbic acid and in situ kinetics: a new approach to vitamin requirements. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 54: 1157S-1162S. 
13. Kaufman, S. 1974. Dopamine-beta-hydroxylase. J. Psychiatr. Res., 11: 303-316. 
14. Eipper, B., Milgram, S.L., Husten, E.J., Yun, H. & Mains, R.E. 1993. Peptidylglycine
alpha amidating monooxygenase: a multifunctional protein with catalytic, processing, and
routing domains. Prot Sci. 2: 489-497. 
15. Eipper, B., Stoffers, D.A. & Mains, R.E.  1992. The biosynthesis of neuropeptides:
peptide alpha amidation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 15: 57-85. 
16. Lindblad, B., Lindstedt, G. & Lindstedt, S. 1970. The mechanism of enzymic formation
of homogentisate from p-hydroxyphenyl pyruvate. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 92: 7446-7449. 
17. Schorah, C.J., Sobala, G.M., Sanderson, M., Collis, N. & Primrose, J.M. 1991.
Gastric juice ascorbic acid: effects of disease and implications for gastric carcinogenesis.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 287S-93S.
REFERENCES
82
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
18. Correa, P. 1992. Human gastric carcinogenesis: a multistep and multifactorial process–
First American Cancer Society Award Lecture on Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention.
Cancer Res., 52: 6735-6740. 
19. Byers, T. & Guerrero, N. 1995. Epidemiologic Evidence for vitamin C and vitamin E in
cancer prevention. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 62: 1385S-1392S. 
20. Jialal, I. & Grundy, S.M. 1991. Preservation of the endogenous antioxidants in low
density lipoprotein by ascorbate but not probucol during oxidative modification. J. Clin.
Inv., 87: 597-601.
21. Stokes, P.L., Melikian, V., Leeming, R.L., Portman-Graham, H. Blair, J.A. & Cooke,
W.T. 1975. Folate metabolism in scurvy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 28: 126-9.
22. Hallberg, D., Brune, M. & Rossander-Hulthen, L. 1987. Is there a physiological role of
vitamin C in iron absorption. Ann. NY Acad. Sci., 498: 324-332 
23. Hallberg, L., Rossander, L., Persson, H. & Svahn, E. 1982. Deleterious effects of
prolonged warming of meals on ascorbic acid content and iron absorption. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 36: 846-850 
24. Hallberg, L. 1987. Wheat fiber, phytates and iron absorption. Scand. J. Gastroenterol.
Suppl., 129: 73-9: 73-79.
25. McLaren, D.S.  1992. A colour atlas of nutritional disorders. London, Wolfe Medical
Publications.
26. Bartley, W., Krebs, H.A. & O’Brien, J.R.P. 1953. Vitamin C requirements of Human
adults. Medical Research Council Special Report Series No. 280, London, HMSO.
27. Krebs, H.A. & Vitamin C Subcommittee of the Accessory Food Factors Committee
M.R.C.  1948. Vitamin C Requirement of Human Adults: Experimental Study of Vitamin
C Deprivation in Man. Lancet, 254: 853-858. 
28. Baker, E.M., Hodges, R.E., Hood, J., Sauberlich, H.E. & March, S.C. 1969.
Metabolism of ascorbic-1-14C acid in experimental Human scurvy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 22:
549-558.
29. Baker, E.M., Hodges, R.E., Hood, J., Sauberlich, H.E. March, S.C. & Canham, J.E.
1971. Metabolism of 14C- and 3H-labeled L-ascorbic acid in Human scurvy. Am. J. Clin
Nut., 24: 444-454. 
30. Kallner, A., Hartmann, D. & Hornig, D. 1979. Steady-state turnover and body pool of
ascorbic acid in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 32: 530-539. 
31. Moser, U. & Weber, F. 1984. Uptake of ascorbic acid by Human granulocytes. Int. J. Vit.
Nutr. Res., 54: 47-53 
32. Lee, W., Davis, K.A., Rettmer, R.L. & Labbe, R.F. 1988. Ascorbic acid status:
biochemical and clinical considerations. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 48:286-290.
33. McCormick, D.B. & Zhang, Z. 1993. Cellular assimilation of water-soluble vitamins in
the mammal: riboflavin, B6, biotin and C. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 202: 265-270.
34. Levine, M., Conry-Cantilena, C., Wang, Y., Welch R.W., Washko, P.W., Dhariwal
K.R., Park, J.B., Lazarev, A. & Graumlich, J.K.  1996. Vitamin C pharmacokinetics in
healthy volunteers: evidence for a Recommended Dietary Allowance. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci., 93: 3704-3709.
35. Graumlich, J., Ludden, T.M., Conry-Cantilena, C., Cantilena, L.R., Wang, Y. &
Levine M. 1997. Pharmacokinetic model of ascorbic acid in Humans during depletion and
repletion. Pharmaceut. Res., 14: 1133-1139.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 83
36. Arab, L., Schellenberg, B. & Schlierf, G. 1982. Nutrition and health. A survey of young
men and women in Heidelberg. Ann. Nutr. Metab., 26: 1-77.
37. Gregory, J.R., Foster, K., Tyler, H. & Wiseman, M. 1990. The dietary and nutritional
survey of British adults. London: HMSO.
38. Life Sciences Research Office, Interagency Board for Nutrition Monitoring and
Related Research. 1995. Third Report on Nutrition Monitoring in the United States.
Washington, D.C. U. S. Government Printing Office.
39. Finch, S., Doyle, W., Bates, C.J. Prentice, A., Smithers, G. & Clarke, P.C. 1998.
National diet and nutrition survey: people aged 65 years and over. Volume 1: Report of
the diet and nutrition survey. London: The Stationery Office.
40. Basch, C.E., Syber, P. & Shea, S. 5-a-day:dietary behavior and the fruit and vegetable
intake of Latino children. Am. J. Public Health 1994; 84:814-818. 
41. WHO. 1990. Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases. WHO Technical
Report Series 797. Geneva: World Health Organization.
42. Williams, C. 1995. Healthy eating: clarifying advice about fruit and vegetables. BMJ,
310: 1453-55.
43. Narasinga Rao, B.S. 1995. Dietary intake of antioxidants in relation to nutrition profiles
of Indian population groups. Nutrition, lipids, health and disease, p.343-353 [A.S.H. Ong,
E. Niki, and L. Packer editors]. Champaign Illinois: AOCS Press.
44. Chang-Claude, J.C. 1990. Epidemiologic study of precancerous lesions of the
oesophagus in young persons in a high-incidence area for the oesophageal cancer in
China. Heidelberg: Heidelberg University.
45. Knowles, J., Thurnham, D.I., Hill, A.V.S., Tang, C. & Greenwood, B.M. 1991. Plasma
ascorbate concentrations in Human malaria. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 50: 66A.
46. Thurnham, D.I., Singkamani, R., Kaewichit, R. & Wongworapat, K. 1990. Influence
of malaria infection on peroxyl-radical trapping capacity in plasma from rural and urban
Thai adults. Br. J. Nutr., 64: 257-271. 
47. Jennings, P.E., Chiroco, S., Jones, A.F., Lunec, J. & Barnett, A.H. 1987. Vitamin C
metabolites and microangiography in diabetes mellitis. Diab. Res., 6: 151-154 
48. Thurnham, D.I. 1994. b-Carotene, are we misreading the signals in risk groups? Some
analogies with vitamin C. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53: 557-569 
49. Faruque, O., Rahman Khan, M., Rahman M. & Ahmed F. 1995. Relationship between
smoking and antioxidant status. Br. J. Nutr., 73: 625-632.
50. Yong, L., Brown, C.C., Schatzkin, A., Dresser, C.M., Slesinski, M.J., Cox, C.S., &
Taylor P.R. 1997. Intake of vitamins E, C, and A and risk of lung cancer. Am. J.
Epidemiol.,146: 231-243. 
51. Byers, T. & Mouchawar, J. 1998. Antioxidants and cancer prevention in 1997. In:
Paoletti R, Sies H, Bug J., Grossi E, Poli A, eds. Vitamin C: the state of the art in disease
prevention 60 years after the Nobel Prize. ,p. 29-40. Milan: Springer. 
52. Schorah, C.J. 1998. Vitamin C and gastric cancer prevention. In: Paoletti R, Sies H, Bug
J., Grossi E, Poli A, eds. Vitamin C: the state of the art in disease prevention sixty years
after the Nobel Prize. p. 41-49. Milan: Springer, 
53. Blot ,W.J., Li, J., Taylor, P.R., Guo, W., Dawsey, S., Wang, G.Q., Yang, C.S., Zheng,
S.F., Gail, M. & Li G.Y. 1993. Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China:
supplementation with specific vitamin/mineral combinations, cancer incidence, and
disease-specific mortality in the general population. J. Natl. Cancer. Instit., 85:
1483-1492.
84
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
54. Greenberg, E.R., Baron, J.A. Tosteson, T.D., et al. 1994. A clinical trial of antioxidant
vitamins to prevent colorectal adenoma. Polyp Prevention Study Group. N. Engl. J. Med.,
331: 141-147. 
55. Rimm, E.B., Stampfer, M.J., Ascherio, A., Giovannucci, E., Colditz, G.A. & Willett,
W.C. 1993. Vitamin E consumption and the risk of coronary heart disease in men. N.
Engl. J. Med., 328: 1450-1456.
56. Sahyoun, N.R., Jacques, P.F. & Russell, R.M. 1994. Carotenoids, vitamins C and E, and
mortality in an elderly population. Am. J. Epidemiol., 144: 501-511. 
57. Jha P., Flather, M., Lonn, E., Farkouh, M. & Yusuf, S. 1995. The antioxidant vitamins
and cardiovascular disease: a critical review of the epidemiologic and clinical trial data.
Ann. Intern. Med., 123: 860-872. 
58. Losonczy, K.G., Harris, T.B. & Havlik, RJ. 1996. Vitamin E and vitamin C supplement
use and risk of all cause and coronary heart disease mortality in older persons: the
established populations for epidemiologic studies of the elderly. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 64:
190-196. 
59. Enstrom, J.E., Kanim, L.E. & Klein, M.A. 1992. Vitamin C intake and mortality among
a sample of the United States population [see comments]. Epidemiology, 3: 194-202. 
60. Enstrom, J.E., Kanim, L.E., & Breslow, L. 1986. The relationship between vitamin C
intake, general health practices, and mortality in Alameda County, California. Am. J.
Public Health, 76: 1124-1130. 
61. Seddon, J.M., Ajani, U.A., Sperduto, R.D., et al. 1995. Dietary carotenoids, vitamins A,
C, and E, and advanced age-related macular degeneration. Eye Disease Case-Control
Study Group [see comments] [published erratum appears in JAMA 1995 Feb
22;273(8):622]. JAMA,  272: 1413-1420. 
62. Riemersma, R.A., Wood, D.A., Macintyre, C.C., Elton, R.A., Gey, K.F. & Oliver
M.F. 1991. Risk of angina pectoris and plasma concentrations of vitamins A, C, and E
and carotene [see comments]. Lancet, 337:1-5. 
63. Gey, K.F., Moser, U.K., Jordan, P., Stahelin, H.B., Eichholzer, M. & Ludin, E. 1993.
Increased risk of cardiovascular disease at suboptimal plasma concentrations of essential
antioxidants: an epidemiological update with special attention to carotene and vitamin C.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 57:787S-797S. 
64. Kushi, L.H., Folsom, A.R., Princas R.J., Mink, P.J., Wu, Y. & Bostick, R.M. 1996.
Dietary antioxidant vitamins and death from coronary heart disease in postmenopausal
women. N. Engl. J. Med., 334: 1156-1162. 
65. Simon, J.A., Hudes, E.S. & Browner, W.S. 1998. Serum ascorbic acid and
cardiovascular disease prevalence in US adults. Epidemiology, 9: 316-321. 
66. Jacques, P.F., Chylack, L.T., Jr., McGandy, R.B. & Hartz, S.C. 1988. Antioxidant
status in persons with and without senile cataract. Arch. Ophthalmol., 106: 337-340. 
67. Robertson, J.M., Donner, A.P. & Trevithick, J.R. 1991. A possible role for vitamins C
and E in cataract prevention. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53:346S-351S. 
68. Leske, M.C., Chylack, L.T. & Wu, S. 1991. The lens opacities case/control study: risk
factors for cataract. Arch. Opthalmol., 109: 144-251. 
69. Italian-American Cataract Study Group. 1991. Risk factors for age-related cortical,
nuclear, and posterior sub-capsular cataracts. Am. J. Epidemiol.,  133: 541-553. 
70. Goldberg, J., Flowerdew, G., Smith, E., Brody, J.A. & Tso, M.O.  1988. Factors
associated with age-related macular degeneration. An analysis of data from the first
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Am. J. Epidemiol.,128: 700-710.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
 85
71. Vitale, S., West, S., Hallfrisch, J., et al. 1993. Plasma antioxidants and risk of cortical
and nuclear cataract. Epidemiology, 4: 195-203. 
72. Hankinson, S.E., Stampfer, M.J., Seddon, J.M., et al. 1992. Nutrient intake and
cataract extraction in women: a prospective study. BMJ, 305: 335-339. 
73. Mares-Perlman, J.A. 1997. Contribution of epidemiology to understanding relationships
of diet to age-related cataract. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 739-740. 
74. Jacques, P.F., Taylor, A., Hankinson, S.E., Willett, W.C., Mahnken B., Lee, Y., Vaid,
k. & Lahav, M. 1997. Long-term vitamin C supplement use and prevalence of early
age-related lens opacities. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 911-916. 
75. Haytowitz, D. 1995. Information from USDA's Nutrient Data Book. J. Nutr., 125:
1952-1955. 
76. Bates, C.J., Prentice, A.M. & Paul, A.A. 1994. Seasonal variations in vitamins A, C,
riboflavin and folate intakes and status of pregnant of lactating women in a rural Gambian
community: some possible implications. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 48: 660-668.
77. Paul, A.A. & Southgate, D.A.T. 1979. McCance and Widdowson’s, The Composition of
Foods. London: HMSO.
78. N.A.S. Institute of Medicine. 1997. Vitamin C fortification of food aid commodities:
Final Report, Washington D.C., National Academy Press. 
79. Newton, H.M.V., Morgan, D.B., Schorah, C.J. & Hullin, R.P. 1983. Relation between
intake and plasma concentration of vitamin C in elderly women. BMJ, 287: 1429
80. Melethil, S.L., Mason, W.E. & Chiang, C. 1986. Dose dependent absorption and
excretion of vitamin C in Humans. Int. J. Pharm., 31:83-89. 
81. Blanchard, J. 1991. Depletion and repletion kinetics of vitamin C in Humans. J. Nutr.,
121: 170-176.
82. Olson, J.A. & Hodges, R.E. 1987. Recommended dietary intakes (RDI) of vitamin C in
Humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 45: 693-703.
83. Irwin, M.I. & Hutchins, B.K. 1976. A conspectus of research on vitamin C requirements
in man. J. Nutr., 106: 821-879.
84. WHO. 1998. Complementary feeding of young children in developing countries: a review
of current scientific knowledge. Geneva: World Health Organization.
85. Van Zoeren-Grobben, D., Schrijver, J., Van den Berg, G.J. & Berger, H.M. 1987.
Human milk vitamin content after pasteurisation, storage, or tube feeding. Arch. Dis.
Child., 62:161-165 
86. Department of Health and Social Security. 1979. Nutrition and health in old age.
Report on Health and Social Subjects. No. 16. London: H.M.S.O.
87. Kallner, A.B., Hartmann, D. & Hornig, D.H. 1981. On the requirements of ascorbic
acid in man: steady state turnover and body pool in smokers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 1347-
1355.
88. Kubler, W. & Gehler, J. 1970. On the kinetics of the intestinal absorption of ascorbic
acid: a contribution to the calculation of an absorption process that is not proportional to
the dose. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res., 40: 442-453 
89. Schmidt K.-H., Hagmaier, V., Hornig, D.H., Vuilleumier, J. & Rutishauser, G. 1981.
Urinary oxalate excretion after large intakes of ascorbic acid in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
34: 305-311 
90. Urivetzky, M., Kessaris D. & Smith, A.D. 1992. Ascorbic acid overdosing: a risk factor
for calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis. J. Urol., 147: 1215-1218.
86
      Chapter 6: Vitamin C
91. Mehta J.B., Singhal S.B. & Mehta B.C. 1990. Ascorbic acid induced haemolysis in G-6-
PD deficiency. Lancet, 336: 944.
92. Iwamoto, N., Kawaguchi, T., Horikawa, K., Nagakura, S., Hidaka M., Kagimoto T.,
Takatsuki, K. & Nakakuma H. 1994. Haemolysis induced by ascorbic acid in
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Lancet, 343: 357. 
93. Langlois, M.R., Delanghe, J.R., De Buyzere, M.L., Bernard, D.R. & Ouyang, J. 1997.
Effect of haptoglobin on the metabolism of vitamin C. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 606-610.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
87
Role of vitamin A in human metabolic processes
V
itamin A (retinol) is an essential nutrient needed in small amounts by humans for the
normal functioning of the visual system; growth and development; and maintenance of
epithelial cellular integrity, immune function, and reproduction. These dietary needs for
vitamin A are normally provided for as preformed retinol (mainly as retinyl ester) and pro-
vitamin A carotenoids.
Overview of vitamin A metabolism 
Preformed vitamin A in animal foods occurs as retinyl esters of fatty acids in association with
membrane-bound cellular lipid and fat-containing storage cells. Pro-vitamin A carotenoids in
foods of vegetable origin are also associated with cellular lipids but are embedded in complex
cellular structures such as the cellulose-containing matrix of chloroplasts or the pigment-
containing portion of chromoplasts. Normal digestive processes free vitamin A and
carotenoids from embedding food matrices, a more efficient process from animal than from
vegetable tissues. Retinyl esters are hydrolysed and the retinol and freed carotenoids are
incorporated into lipid-containing, water-miscible micellar solutions. Products of fat digestion
(e.g., fatty acids, monoglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids) and secretions in bile (e.g.,
bile salts and hydrolytic enzymes) are essential for the efficient solubilisation of retinol and
especially for solubilisation of the very lipophilic carotenoids (e.g., α- and β-carotene, β-
cryptoxanthin, and lycopene) in the aqueous intestinal milieu. Micellar solubilisation is a
prerequisite to their efficient passage into the lipid-rich membrane of intestinal mucosal cells
(i.e., enterocytes) (1-3). Diets critically low in dietary fat (under about 5–10 g daily) (4) or
disease conditions that interfere with normal digestion and absorption leading to steatorrhea
(e.g., pancreatic and liver diseases and frequent gastroenteritis) can therefore impede the
efficient absorption of retinol and carotenoids. Retinol and some carotenoids enter the
intestinal mucosal brush border by diffusion in accord with the concentration gradient
between the micelle and plasma membrane of enterocytes. Some carotenoids pass into the
enterocyte and are solubilized into chylomicrons without further change whereas some of the
pro-vitamin A carotenoids are converted to retinol by a cleavage enzyme in the brush border
(3). Retinol is trapped intracellularly by re-esterification or binding to specific intracellular
binding proteins. Retinyl esters and unconverted carotenoids together with other lipids are
incorporated into chylomicrons, excreted into intestinal lymphatic channels, and delivered to
the blood through the thoracic duct (2).
Tissues extract most lipids and some carotenoids from circulating chylomicrons, but
most retinyl esters are stripped from the chylomicron remnant, hydrolysed, and taken up
primarily by parenchymal liver cells. If not immediately needed, retinol is re-esterified and
retained in the fat-storing cells of the liver (variously called adipocytes, stellate cells, or Ito
cells). The liver parenchymal cells also take in substantial amounts of carotenoids. Whereas
most of the body's vitamin A reserve remains in the liver, carotenoids are also deposited
elsewhere in fatty tissues throughout the body (1). Usually, turnover of carotenoids in tissues
is relatively slow, but in times of low dietary carotenoid intake, stored carotenoids are
mobilised. A recent study in one subject using stable isotopes suggests that retinol can be
Chapter 7
Vitamin A
88 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
derived not only from conversion of dietary pro-vitamin carotenoids in enterocytes – the
major site of bioconversion – but also from hepatic conversion of circulating pro-vitamin
carotenoids (5). The quantitative contribution to vitamin A requirements of carotenoid
converted to retinoids beyond the enterocyte is unknown.
Following hydrolysis of stored retinyl esters, retinol combines with a plasma-specific
transport protein, retinol-binding protein (RBP). This process, including synthesis of the
unoccupied RBP (apo-RBP), occurs to the greatest extent within liver cells but it may also
occur in some peripheral tissues. The RBP-retinol complex (holo-RBP) is secreted into the
blood where it associates with another hepatically synthesised and excreted larger protein,
transthyretin. The transthyretin-RBP-retinol complex circulates in the blood, delivering the
lipophilic retinol to tissues; its large size prevents its loss through kidney filtration (1).
Dietary restriction in energy, proteins, and some micronutrients can limit hepatic synthesis of
proteins specific to mobilisation and transport of vitamin A. Altered kidney functions or fever
associated with infections (e.g., respiratory infections [6] or diarrhoea [7]) can increase
urinary vitamin A loss.
Holo-RBP transiently associates with target-tissue membranes, and specific
intracellular binding proteins then extract the retinol. Some of the transiently sequestered
retinol is released into the blood unchanged and is recycled (i.e., conserved) (1,8). A limited
reserve of intracellular retinyl esters is formed, that subsequently can provide functionally
active retinol and its oxidation products (i.e., isomers of retinoic acid) as needed
intracellularly. These biologically active forms of vitamin A are associated with specific
cellular proteins which bind with retinoids within cells during metabolism and with nuclear
receptors that mediate retinoid action on the genome (9). Retinoids modulate the transcription
of several hundreds of genes (10-12). In addition to the latter role of retinoic acid, retinol is
the form required for functions in the visual (13) and reproductive systems (14) and during
embryonic development (15).
Holo-RBP is filtered into the glomerulus but recovered from the kidney tubule and
recycled. Normally vitamin A leaves the body in urine only as inactive metabolites which
result from tissue utilisation and as potentially recyclable active glucuronide conjugates of
retinol in bile secretions (8). No single urinary metabolite has been identified which
accurately reflects tissue levels of vitamin A or its rate of utilisation. Hence, at this time urine
is not a useful biologic fluid for assessment of vitamin A nutriture.
Biochemical mechanisms for vitamin A functions
Vitamin A functions at two levels in the body. The first is in the visual cycle in the retina of
the eye; the second is in all body tissues systemically to maintain growth and the soundness of
cells. In the visual system, carrier-bound retinol is transported to ocular tissue and to the retina
by intracellular binding and transport proteins. Rhodopsin, the visual pigment critical to dim-
light vision, is formed in rod cells after conversion of all-trans retinol to retinaldehyde,
isomerization to the 11-cis-form, and binding to opsin. Alteration of rhodopsin through a
cascade of photochemical reactions results in ability to see objects in dim light (13). The
speed at which rhodopsin is regenerated relates to the availability of retinol. Night blindness
is usually an indicator of inadequate available retinol, but it can also be due to a deficit of
other nutrients, which are critical to the regeneration of rhodopsin, such as protein and zinc,
and to some inherited diseases, such as retinitis pigmentosa.
The growth and differentiation of epithelial cells throughout the body are especially
affected by vitamin A deficiency (VAD). Goblet cell numbers are reduced in epithelial
tissues. The consequence is that mucous secretions with their antimicrobial components
diminish. Cells lining protective tissue surfaces fail to regenerate and differentiate, hence
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
89
flatten and accumulate keratin. Both factors – the decline in mucous secretions and loss of
cellular integrity – diminish resistance to invasion by potentially pathogenic organisms. The
immune system is also compromised by direct interference with production of some types of
protective secretions and cells (11). Classical symptoms of xerosis (drying or nonwetability)
and desquamation of dead surface cells as seen in ocular tissue (i.e., xerophthalmia) are the
external evidence of the changes also occurring to various degrees in internal epithelial
tissues.
Current understanding of the mechanism of vitamin A action within cells outside the
visual cycle is that cellular functions are mediated through specific nuclear receptors. These
receptors are activated by binding with specific isomers of retinoic acid (i.e., all-trans and
9-cis retinoic acid). Activated receptors bind to DNA response elements located upstream of
specific genes to regulate the level of expression of those genes (12). The synthesis of a large
number of proteins vital to maintaining normal physiologic functions is regulated by these
retinoid-activated genes. There also may be other mechanisms of action that are as yet
undiscovered (10).
Population at risk and consequences of vitamin A deficiency
Definition of vitamin A deficiency
VAD is not simply defined. WHO defines it as tissue concentrations of vitamin A low enough
to have adverse health consequences even if there is no evidence of clinical xerophthalmia
(16). In addition to the specific signs and symptoms of xerophthalmia and the risk of
irreversible blindness, non-specific symptoms include increased morbidity and mortality, poor
reproductive health, increased risk of anaemia, and contributions to slowed growth and
development. Because these non-specific adverse consequences may occur from other
nutrient deficits as well, it is difficult to attribute non-ocular symptoms specifically to VAD in
the absence of biochemical measurements reflective of vitamin A status.
Geographic distribution and magnitude
In 1996 WHO mapped the global distribution of VAD (Figure 9) and categorised countries
by degree of significance as a public health problem on the basis of both clinical and
moderate and severe sub-clinical (prevalence of low blood levels of retinol) indicators of
deficiency (16,18). In the early 1990s, WHO estimated that about 3 million children had some
form of xerophthalmia annually and, on the basis of blood levels, another 250 million were
sub-clinically deficient (18). The magnitude of the sub-clinical estimate is currently being re-
evaluated to quantitatively establish a benchmark for measuring prevalence trends. The actual
number of sub-clinical deficiencies based on the prevalence of low serum levels of retinol,
however, remains uncertain because of the confounding and poorly quantitative role of
infections (see later discussion).
Epidemiologic studies repeatedly report clustering of VAD, presumably resulting from
concurrent occurrence of several risk factors. This clustering may occur among both
neighbourhoods and households (19).
90 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
Figure 9
Prevalence of VAD in the world (17)
Age and gender
VAD can occur in individuals of any age. However, it is a disabling and potentially fatal
public health problem for children under 6 years of age. VAD-related blindness is most
prevalent in children under 3 years of age (20). This period is characterised by high
requirements for vitamin A to support early rapid growth, the transition from breast-feeding to
dependence on other dietary sources of the vitamin, and increased frequency of respiratory
and gastrointestinal infections. The increased mortality risk from concurrent infections
extends at least to 6 years of age and is associated with both clinical and sub-clinical VAD
(21). There is little information regarding the health consequences of VAD in school-age
children. The prevalence of Bitot's spots (i.e., white foamy patches on the conjunctiva) may
be highest in this age group but their occurrence may reflect past more than current history of
VAD (22). Women of reproductive age are thought also to be vulnerable to VAD during
pregnancy and lactation because they often report night blindness (23,24) and because their
breast-milk is frequently low in vitamin A (25,26). Not all night blindness in pregnant
women, however, responds to vitamin A (24).
There is no consistent, clear indication in humans of a gender differential in vitamin A
requirements during childhood. Growth rates and presumably the need for vitamin A from
birth to 10 years for boys are consistently higher than those for girls (27). In the context of
varied cultural and community settings, however, variations in gender-specific child-feeding
and care practices are likely to subsume a small gender differential in requirements to account
for reported gender differences and prevalence of xerophthalmia. Pregnant and lactating
women require additional vitamin A to support maternal and foetal tissue growth and lactation
losses, additional vitamin A which is not needed by other post-adolescent adults (28).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
91
Risk factors
VAD is most common in populations consuming most of their vitamin A needs from pro-
vitamin carotenoid sources and where minimal dietary fat is available (29). About 90 percent
of ingested preformed vitamin A is absorbed, whereas the absorption efficiency of pro-
vitamin A carotenoids varies widely depending on the type of plant source and the fat content
of the accompanying meal (30). Where it is possible to increase dietary fat, this will likely
improve the absorption of vitamin A activity from the diet.
In areas with endemic VAD, fluctuations in the incidence of VAD throughout the year
reflect the balance between intake and need. Periods of general food shortage (and specific
shortages in vitamin A–rich foods), peak incidence of common childhood infectious diseases
(diarrhoea, respiratory infections, and measles), and periodic seasonal growth spurts affect the
balance. Seasonal food availability can influence VAD prevalence by directly influencing
access to pro-vitamin A sources; for example, the scarcity of mangoes in hot arid months
followed by the glutting of the market with mangoes during harvest seasons (31). Seasonal
growth spurts in children frequently follow seasonal postharvest increases in energy and
macronutrient intakes. These increases are usually obtained from staple grains (e.g., rice) and
tubers (e.g., light-coloured yams) which are not good sources of some micronutrients (e.g.,
vitamin A to support the growth spurt) (32).
Food habits and taboos often restrict consumption of potentially good food sources of
vitamin A (e.g., mangoes and green leafy vegetables). Culture-specific factors for feeding
children, adolescents, and pregnant and lactating women are common (29,33-35). Illness- and
childbirth-related proscription of the use of specific foods pervade in many traditional cultures
(36). Such influences alter short- and long-term food distribution within families. However,
some cultural practices can be protective of vitamin A status and they need to be identified
and reinforced.
Morbidity and mortality
The consequences of VAD are manifested differently in different tissues. In the eye, the
symptoms and signs, together referred to as xerophthalmia, have a long, well-recognised
history and have until recently been the basis for estimating the global burden from the
disease (20). Although ocular symptoms and signs are the most specific indicators of VAD,
they occur only after other tissues have impaired functions that are less specific and less easily
assessed.
The prevalence of ocular manifestations (i.e., xerophthalmia or clinical VAD) is now
recognised to far underestimate the magnitude of the problem of functionally significant
VAD. Many more preschool-age children and perhaps older children and women who are
pregnant or lactating have their health compromised when they are sub-clinically deficient. In
young children, sub-clinical deficiency, like clinical deficiency, increases the severity of some
infections, particularly diarrhoea and measles, and the risk of dying (21,37). The incidence
(38) and prevalence (39) of diarrhoea may also increase with sub-clinical VAD. Meta-
analyses conducted by three independent groups using data from several randomised trials
provide convincing evidence that community-based improvement of the vitamin A status of
deficient children 6 months to 6 years of age reduces their risk of dying by 20–30 percent on
average (21,40,41). Mortality in children who are blind from keratomalacia or who have
corneal disease is reported to be from 50 percent to 90 percent (20,42) and measles mortality
associated with VAD is increased up to 50 percent (43). Limited data are available from
controlled studies of the possible link between morbidity history and vitamin A status of
pregnant and lactating women (44).
92 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
There are discrepancies in the linkage between incidence and severity of infectious
morbidity of various aetiologies and vitamin A status. The weight of evidence supports an
association of VAD with severity of an infection once acquired, except for respiratory
diseases, which are nonresponsive (16,37-39,45). The severity of the pneumonia associated
with measles, however, is an exception because it decreases with treatment with vitamin A
supplements (43,46).
Infectious diseases depress circulating retinol and contribute to vitamin A depletion.
Enteric infections may alter absorptive-surface area, compete for absorption-binding sites, and
increase urinary loss (7,47,48). Febrile systemic infections also increase urinary loss (6,49)
and metabolic utilisation rates and may reduce apparent retinol stores if fever occurs
frequently (50). In the presence of latent deficiency, disease occurrence is often associated
with precipitating ocular signs (51,52). Measles virus infection is especially devastating to
vitamin A metabolism, adversely interfering with both efficiencies of utilisation and
conservation (43,52,53). Severe protein-energy malnutrition affects many aspects of vitamin
A metabolism, and even when some retinyl ester stores are still present, malnutrition – often
coupled with infection – can prevent transport-protein synthesis, that results in immobilisation
of existing vitamin A stores (54).
The compromised integrity of the epithelium, together with the possible alteration in
hormonal balance at severe levels of deficiency, impairs normal reproductive functions in
animals (9,14,15,25,55,56). Controlled human studies are, of course, lacking. In animals and
Humans, congenital anomalies can result if the foetus is exposed to severe deficiency or large
excesses of vitamin A at critical periods early in gestation (first trimester) when foetal organs
are being formed (25,57). Reproductive performance measured by infant outcomes in one
community-based clinical intervention trial, however, was not influenced by vitamin A status
(44).
The growth of children may be impaired by VAD. Interventions with vitamin A only
have not consistently demonstrated improved growth in community studies because VAD
seldom occurs in isolation of other nutrient deficiencies that also affect growth and may be
more limiting (58).
A lack of vitamin A can affect iron metabolism when deficiencies of both nutrients
coexist and particularly in environments that favour frequent infections (59). Maximum
haemoglobin response occurs when iron and vitamin A deficiencies are corrected together
(60). VAD appears to influence the availability of storage iron for use by haematopoietic
tissue (60,61). However, additional research is needed to clarify the mechanisms of the
apparent interaction.
Units of expression 
In blood, tissues, and human milk, vitamin A levels are conventionally expressed in µg/dL or
µmol/l of all-trans retinol. Except for postprandial conditions, most of the circulating vitamin
A is retinol whereas in most tissues (such as the liver), secretions (such as human milk), and
other animal food sources it exists mainly as retinyl esters, that are usually hydrolysed before
analytical detection.
To express the vitamin A activity of carotenoids in diets on a common basis, a joint
FAO/WHO Expert Group (62) in 1967 introduced the concept of the retinol equivalent (RE)
and established the following relationships among food sources of vitamin A:
1 µg retinol
=
1 RE
1 µg β-carotene
=
0.167 µg RE
1 µg other pro-vitamin A carotenoids
=
0.084 µg RE
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
93
These equivalencies were derived from balance studies to account for the less-efficient
absorption of carotenoids (thought to be about one-third that of retinol) and their
bioconversion to vitamin A (one-half for β-carotene and one-fourth for other pro-vitamin
carotenoids). It was recognised at the time that the recommended conversion factors (i.e., 1:6
for vitamin A:β-carotene and 1:12 for vitamin A: all other pro-vitamin carotenoids) were only
average estimates for a mixed diet. Recently there has been renewed interest in examining
bio-availability factors by using more quantitative stable isotope techniques for measuring
whole-body stores in response to controlled intakes (63-65) and by following postabsorption
carotenoids in the triacylglycerol-rich lipoprotein fraction (66-68). The data are inconsistent
but in general suggests that revision toward lower bio-availability estimates is likely. Until
additional definitive data are available, however, the above conversion factors will be used
(67, 68).
Retinol equivalents in a diet are calculated as the sum of the weight of the retinol
portion of preformed vitamin A with the weight of β-carotene divided by its conversion factor
and with the weight of other carotenoids divided by their conversion factor (69). Most recent
food composition tables report β-carotene and sometimes other pro-vitamin A carotenoids as
µg/g edible portion. However, older food composition tables frequently report vitamin A as
international units (IUs). The following applies to determining comparable values as µg:
1 IU retinol
=
0.3 µg retinol
1 IU β-carotene
=
0.6 µg β-carotene
1 IU retinol
=
3 IU β-carotene
It is strongly recommended that weight or molar units replace the use of IU to
decrease confusion and overcome limitations in the non-equivalence of the IU values for
retinol and beta-carotene.
Dietary sources
Preformed vitamin A is found almost exclusively in animal products, such as human milk,
glandular meats, liver and fish liver oils (especially), egg yolk, and whole milk and dairy
products. Preformed vitamin A is also used to fortify processed foods, that may include sugar,
cereals, condiments, fats, and oils (70). Pro-vitamin A carotenoids are found in green leafy
vegetables (e.g., spinach, amaranth, and young leaves from various sources), yellow
vegetables (e.g., pumpkins, squash, and carrots), and yellow and orange noncitrus fruits (e.g.,
mangoes, apricots, and papaya). Red palm oil produced in several countries worldwide is
especially rich in pro-vitamin A (71). Some other indigenous plants also may be unusually
rich sources of pro-vitamin A. Such examples are the palm fruit known in Brazil as burití, that
is found in areas along the Amazon (as well as elsewhere in Latin America) (72), and the fruit
known as gac in Vietnam, that is used to colour rice, particularly on ceremonial occasions
(73). Foods containing pro-vitamin A carotenoids tend to be less biologically available but
more affordable than animal products. It is mainly for this reason that carotenoids provide
most of the vitamin A activity in the diets of economically deprived populations.
Dietary intake and patterns
Vitamin A status cannot be assessed from dietary intake alone, but dietary intake assessment
can provide evidence of risk of an inadequate status. Quantitative collection of dietary
information is fraught with measurement problems. These problems arise both from obtaining
representative quantitative dietary histories from individuals, communities, or both and from
interpreting these data while accounting for differences in bio-availability, preparation losses,
and variations in food composition data among population groups (70). This is especially
94 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
difficult in populations consuming most of their dietary vitamin A from pro-vitamin
carotenoid sources. Simplified guidelines have been developed recently in an effort to
improve the obtaining of reliable dietary intake information from individuals and
communities (68,74).
World and regional supply and patterns
In theory the world’s food supply is sufficient to meet global requirements. Great
differences exist, however, in the available sources (animal and vegetable) and in per capita
consumption of the vitamin among different countries, age categories, and socio-economic
groups. VAD as a global public health problem, therefore, is largely due to inequitable food
distribution among and within countries and households in relation to need for ample bio-
available vitamin A sources (75,76).
Earlier FAO global estimates in 1984 indicated that preformed vitamin A constituted
about one-third of total dietary vitamin A activity (69). World availability of vitamin A for
human consumption at that time was approximately 220 µg of preformed retinol per capita
daily and 560 µg RE from pro-vitamin carotenoids (about 3400 µg carotenoids for a 6:1
conversion factor) per person per day, for a total of about 790 µg RE. These values are based
on supply estimates and not consumption estimates. Losses commonly occur during food
storage and processing, both industrially and in the home (70).
The estimated available regional supply of vitamin A from a more recent global
evaluation (76) shown in Table 16 illustrates the variability in amounts and sources of vitamin
A. The variability is further complicated by access to the available supply, that varies with
household income, poverty being a yardstick for risk of VAD. VAD is most prevalent in
Southeast Asia, Africa, and the Western Pacific, where vegetable sources contribute nearly 80
percent or more of the available supply of retinol equivalents. Furthermore, in Southeast Asia
the total available supply is about half of that of most other regions and is particularly low in
animal sources. In contrast, the Americas, Europe, and Eastern Mediterranean regions have a
supply ranging from 800 to 1000 µg RE/day, one-third of which comes from animal sources.
Recent national data from the USA Continuing Survey of Food Consumption (77) and the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (78) included mean dietary intakes of
children 0–6 years of age of 864 ± 497 and 921 ± 444 µg RE daily. In the Dietary and
Nutritional Survey of British Adults (79), the median intake of men and women 35-49 years
old was 1118 µg RE and 926 µg RE, respectively, which corresponded to serum retinol
concentrations of 2.3 µmol/l and 1.8 µmol/l, respectively. In another selected survey in the
United Kingdom, median intakes for nonpregnant women who did not consume liver or liver
products during the survey week were reported to be 686 µg RE daily (80).
The available world supply figures in Table 16 were recently reassessed based on a
bio-availability ratio of 1:30 for retinol to other pro-vitamin A carotenoids (81). This
conversion factor was justified on the basis of one published controlled intervention study
conducted in Indonesia (82) and a limited number of other studies not yet published in full.
Applying the unconfirmed conversion factor to the values in Table 16 would lead to the
conclusion that regional and country needs for vitamin A could not be met from
predominantly vegetarian diets. This is inconsistent with the preponderance of epidemiologic
evidence. Most studies report a positive response when vegetable sources of pro-vitamin A
are given under controlled conditions to deficient subjects freed of confounding parasite loads
and provided with sufficient dietary fat (83,84). Emerging data are likely to justify a lower
biologic activity for pro-vitamin A carotenoids because of the mix of total carotenoids found
in food sources in a usual meal (67,68). This Consultation concluded that the 1:6
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
95
bioconversion factor originally derived on the basis of balance studies should be retained until
there is firm confirmation from ongoing studies that use more precise methodologies.
Table 16
Available supply of vitamin A by WHO region
µg RE/day
Africa
775
122
654 (84)a
Region
Americas
814
295
519 (64)
Southeast Asia
431
53
378 (90)
Europe
738
271
467 (63)
Eastern Mediterranean
936
345
591 (63)
Western Pacific 
997
216
781 (78)
 Total
782
212
565 (72)
aNumbers in parentheses indicate the  percent of total retinol equivalents from 
 carotenoid food sources.
 Source: ACC/SCN, 1993 (76).
Evidence for making recommendations
Indicators of vitamin A deficiency
Ocular signs of VAD are measured by clinical examination and history and are quite specific
in preschool-age children. However, these are rare occurrences that require examination of
large populations to obtain incidence and prevalence data. Sub-clinical VAD is more
prevalent, requiring smaller sample sizes to obtain valid prevalence estimates (16).
A full description of clinical indicators with coloured illustrations for each is found in
the WHO Field Guide (20). The most frequently occurring is night blindness, which is the
earliest manifestation of xerophthalmia. In mild form it is generally noticeable after stress
from a bright light that bleaches the rhodopsin (visual purple) found in the retina. VAD
prolongs the time to regenerate rhodopsin, thus delays adaptation time in dark environments.
Night-blind young children tend to stumble when going from bright to dimly lighted areas and
they, as well as night-blind mothers, tend to remain inactive at dusk and at night (85). No
field-applicable objective tool is currently available for measuring night blindness in children
under about 3 years of age. It can be measured by history in certain cultures (86). When night
blindness is prevalent, many cultures coin a word descriptive of the characteristic symptom
that they can reliably recall on questioning, making this a useful tool for assessing the
prevalence of VAD (87). Questioning for night blindness is not consistently a reliable
assessment measure where a local term is absent. In addition, there is no clearly defined blood
retinol level that is directly associated with occurrence of the symptom. Vitamin A – related
night blindness, however, responds rapidly, usually within 1–2 days, to administration of
vitamin A.
Sub-clinical vitamin A deficiency
Direct measurement of concentrations of vitamin A in the liver where it is stored or in the
total body pool relative to known specific vitamin A–related functions (e.g., night blindness)
would be the indicator of choice for determining requirements. This cannot be done with the
methodology now available for population use. There are several practical biochemical
methods for estimating sub-clinical vitamin A status but all have limitations (16,86,88,89).
Each method is useful to identify deficient populations, but no one of these indicators is
definitive or directly related quantitatively to disease occurrence. The indicators of choice are
Total
µg RE/day
Animal sources
Vegetable sources
µg RE/day
96 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
listed in Table 17. These indicators are less specific to VAD than clinical eye signs and less
sensitive for measuring sub-clinical vitamin A status. WHO recommends that where feasible
at least two sub-clinical biochemical indicators, or one biochemical and a composite of
non-biochemical risk factors, should be measured and that both types of indicators should
point to deficiency in order to identify populations at high risk of VAD (16). Cut-off points
given in Table 17 represent the consensus gained from practical experience comparing
populations with some evidence of VAD with those without VAD. There are no field studies
that quantitatively relate the prevalence of adverse health symptoms (e.g., incidence or
prevalence of severe diarrheal disease) and relative levels of biologic indicator cut-off values.
Furthermore, each of the biochemical indicators listed is subject to confounding factors,
which may be unrelated to vitamin A status (e.g., infections).
Table 17
Biochemical indicators of sub-clinical VAD
 in mothers and in children 6–71 months of age
Indicator
Cut-off to indicate deficiency
Night blindness (24–71 mo)
≥ 1% report a history of night blindness
Biochemical
    Breast milk retinol
Serum retinol
Relative dose response 
≥20%
Modified relative dose
response
Source: Adapted from World Health Organization, Geneva, 1996 (16).
Although all biochemical indicators currently available have limitations, the
biochemical indicator of choice for population assessment is the distribution of serum levels
of vitamin A (serum retinol). Only at very low blood levels (<0.35 µmol/l) is there an
association with corneal disease prevalence (90). Blood levels between 0.35 and 0.70 µmol/l
are likely to characterise sub-clinical deficiency (91), but sub-clinical deficiency may still be
present at levels between 0.70 and 1.05 µmol/l and occasionally above 1.05 µmol/l (92). The
prevalence of values below 0.70 µmol/l is a generally accepted population cut-off for
preschool-age children to indicate risk of inadequate vitamin A status (16) and above 1.05 µ
mol/l to indicate an adequate status (93,94). As noted elsewhere, clinical and sub-clinical
infections can lower serum levels of vitamin A on average as much as 25 percent
independently of vitamin A intake (95,96). Therefore, at levels between about 0.5 and 1.05 µ
mol/l, the relative dose response or modified relative dose response test on a subsample of the
population can be useful for identifying the prevalence of critically depleted body stores when
interpreting the left portion of serum retinol distribution curves.
≤1.05 µmol/l
(≤8 µg/g milk fat)
≤0.70 µmol/l
ratio ≥0.06
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
97
Determining mean requirements and setting safe levels of intake 
Requirement and safe level of intake for vitamin A in this report do not differ significantly
from those of the 1988 FAO/WHO Expert Consultation (69) except for adapting to the age
categories defined in this consultation and during pregnancy. The term safe level of intake
used in the 1988 report is retained in this report because the levels in Table 18 do not strictly
correspond to the definition of a recommended nutrient intake.
The mean requirement for an individual is defined as the minimum daily intake of
vitamin A as presented in µg retinol equivalents (µg RE) to prevent xerophthalmia in the
absence of clinical or sub-clinical infection. This intake should account for proportionate bio-
availability of preformed vitamin (about 90 percent) and pro-vitamin A carotenoids from a
diet that contains sufficient fat (e.g., at least 5–10 g). Bio-availability of carotenoids varies
widely by source (e.g., fibrous green leafy vegetables or soft-tissue fruits). The required level
of intake is set to prevent clinical signs of deficiency, allow for normal growth, and reduce the
risk of vitamin A – related severe morbidity and mortality on a population basis. It does not
allow for frequent or prolonged periods of infections or other stresses.
The safe level of intake for an individual is defined as the average continuing intake of
vitamin A required to permit adequate growth and other vitamin A–dependent functions and
to maintain an acceptable total body reserve of the vitamin. This reserve helps offset periods
of low intake or increased need resulting from infections and other stresses. Useful indicators
include a plasma retinol concentration above 0.70 µmol/l, that is associated with a relative
dose response  below 20 percent, or a modified relative dose response below 0.06. For
lactating women, breast-milk retinol levels above 1.05 µmol/l (or above 8 µg/g milk fat) are
considered to reflect minimal maternal stores because levels above 1.75 µmol/l are common
to populations known to be healthy and without evidence of insufficient dietary vitamin A
(25,26).
Infants and children
Vitamin A requirements for infants are calculated from the vitamin A provided in human
milk. During at least the first 6 months of life, exclusive breast-feeding can provide sufficient
vitamin A to maintain health, permit normal growth, and maintain sufficient stores in the liver
(97).
Reported retinol concentrations in human milk varies widely from country to country
(0.70–2.45 µmol/l). In some developing countries the vitamin A intake of breast-fed infants
who grow well and do not show signs of deficiency is from 120 to 170 µg RE/day (26,97).
Such intakes are considered adequate to cover infant requirements if the infant’s weight is
assumed to be at least at the 10th percentile according to WHO standards (69). However, this
intake is unlikely to build adequate body stores because xerophthalmia is common in
preschool-age children in the same communities with somewhat lower intakes. Because of the
need for vitamin A to support the growth rate of infancy, which can vary considerably, a
requirement estimate of 180 µg RE/day seems appropriate.
The safe level for infants up to 6 months of age is based on observations of breast-fed
infants in communities in which good nutrition is the norm. Average consumption of human
milk by such infants is about 750 ml/day during the first 6 months (97). Assuming an average
concentration of vitamin A in human milk of about 1.75 µmol/l, the mean daily intake would
be about 375 µg RE, which is therefore the recommended safe level. From 7-12 months,
human milk intake averages 650 ml, which would provide 325 µg vitamin A daily. Because
breast-fed infants in endemic vitamin A–deficient populations are at increased risk of death
98 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
from 6 months onward, the requirement and recommended safe intake are increased to 190 µg
and 400 µg, respectively.
The requirement (with allowance for variability) and the recommended intake for
older children may be estimated from those derived for late infancy (i.e., 20 and 39 µg RE/kg
body weight/day) (69). On this basis, including allowances for storage requirements and
variability, requirements for preschool children would be in the range of 200–400 µg RE
daily. In poor communities where children 1–6 years old are reported to have intakes of about
100–200 µg RE/day, signs of VAD do occur; in southern India these signs were relieved and
risk of mortality was reduced when the equivalent of 350–400 µg RE/day was given to
children weekly (98). In the United States most preschool-age children maintain serum retinol
levels of 0.70 µmol/l or higher while consuming diets providing 300–400 µg RE/day (from
the databank for the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey).
Adults
Estimates for the requirements and recommended safe intakes for adults are also estimated
from those derived for late infancy, i.e. 4.8 and 9.3 µg RE/kg body weight/day (69). Detailed
accounts for arriving at the requirement for vitamin A is provided in the FAO/WHO report of
1988 (69) and will not be repeated here because there are no new published studies to indicate
a need to revise the assumptions on which the calculations were based. The safe intakes
recommended are consistent with the per capita vitamin A content in the food supply of
countries that show adequate vitamin A status in all sectors of the population. Additional
evidence that the existing safe level of intake is adequate for adults on a population basis is
provided by an analysis of dietary data from the 1990 survey of British adults in whom there
was no evidence of VAD (79). The median intake for another survey of nonpregnant UK
women who did not consume liver or liver products during the survey week was 686 µg/day
(80). This value is substantially above the estimated mean requirement for pregnant women
and falls quite short of the amount in which teratology risk is reported (99-101). About one-
third of the calculated retinol equivalents consumed by the British women came from pro-
vitamin A sources (20 percent from carrots).
Pregnancy
During pregnancy additional vitamin A is needed for the growth and maintenance of the
foetus for providing a limited reserve in the foetal liver and for maternal tissue growth. There
are no reliable figures available for the specific vitamin A requirements for these processes
(28).
Newborn infants need around 100 µg retinol daily to meet their needs for growth.
During the third trimester the foetus grows rapidly and, although obviously smaller in size
than the infant born full term, the foetus presumably has similar needs. Incremental maternal
needs associated with pregnancy are assumed to be provided from maternal reserves in
populations of adequately nourished healthy mothers. In populations consuming at the basal
requirement, an increment of 100 µg/day during the full gestation period should enhance
maternal storage during early pregnancy and allow adequate amounts of vitamin A for the
rapidly growing foetus in late pregnancy. However, this increment may be minimal for
women who normally ingest only the basal requirement level of vitamin A inasmuch as the
needs and growth rate of the foetus will not be affected by the mother’s initial vitamin A
reserves.
A recent study in Nepal (44), where night blindness is prevalent in pregnant women,
provided 7000 µg RE (about 23,300 IU) weekly to pregnant and lactating women (equivalent
to 1000 µg RE/day). This level of intake normalised serum levels of vitamin A and was
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
99
associated with a decrease in prevalence of night blindness and a decrease in maternal
mortality. The findings of this study need to be confirmed. In the interim period, however, it
seems prudent, recognising that a large portion of the world’s population of pregnant women
lives under conditions of deprivation, to increase by 200 µg the recommended safe level to
ensure adequacy of intake during pregnancy. Because therapeutic levels of vitamin A are
generally higher than preventive levels, the safe intake level recommended during pregnancy
is 800 µg RE/day. Women who are or who might become pregnant should carefully limit their
total daily vitamin A intake to a maximum of 3000 µg RE (10 000 IU) to minimise risk of
foetal toxicity (102).
Lactation
If the amounts of vitamin A recommended for infants are supplied by human milk, mothers
should absorb at least as much in their diets to replace maternal losses. Thus, the increments
in basal and recommended intakes during lactation are 180 µg RE and 350 µg RE,
respectively, for the safe recommended intake per day. After the infant reaches the age of 6
months or when solid foods are introduced, the mother’s need for additional amounts of
vitamin A lessens.
Elderly
There is no indication that the vitamin A requirements of healthy elderly individuals differs
from those of other adults. It should be remembered, however, that diseases that impede
vitamin A absorption, storage, and transport might be more common in the elderly than in
other age groups.
Recommended safe intakes
Table 18 provides the estimated mean requirements for vitamin A and the
recommended safe intakes, taking into account the age and gender differences in mean body
weights. For most values the true mean and variance are not known. Values in the table have
been rounded. It should be noted that there are no adequate data available to derive mean
requirements for any group and, therefore, a recommended nutrient intake cannot be
calculated. However, information is available on cures achieved in a few vitamin A–deficient
adult men and on the vitamin A status of groups receiving intakes that are low but
nevertheless adequate to prevent the appearance of deficiency-related syndromes. The figures
for mean dietary requirements are derived from these, with the understanding that the curative
dose is higher than the preventive dose. They are at the upper limits of the range so as to
cover the mean dietary requirements of 97.5 percent of the population (69).
In calculating the safe intake, a normative storage requirement was calculated as a
mean for adults equivalent to 434 µg RE/day, and the recommended safe intake was derived
in part by using this value + 2 standard deviations. It is doubtful that this value can be applied
to deal with growing children. The safe intake for children was compared with the distribution
of intakes and comparable serum vitamin A levels reported for children 0–6 years of age from
the United States and with distributions of serum levels of vitamin A of children 9–62 months
in Australia (103), where evidence of VAD is rare.
100 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
Table 18
Estimated mean requirement and safe level of intake for vitamin A
µg RE/day
Infants and children   
    0–6 months
180
375
    7–12 months
190
400
    1–3 years
    4–6 years
Age group
200
200
400
450
    7–years
250
500
Adolescents, 10–18 years
330–400
600
Adults
    Females,19–65 years
270
500
    Males, 19–65 years
    65+
300
300
600
600
 Pregnant women
370
800
 Lactating women
450
850
Source: Adapted from FAO/WHO, Rome 1988 (69).
Toxicity
Because vitamin A is fat soluble and can be stored, primarily in the liver, routine consumption
of large amounts of vitamin A over a period of time can result in toxic symptoms, including
liver damage, bone abnormalities and joint pain, alopecia, headaches and vomiting, and skin
desquamation. Hypervitaminosis A appears to be due to abnormal transport and distribution
of vitamin A and retinoids caused by overloading of the plasma transport mechanisms (104).
The smallest daily supplement associated with liver cirrhosis that has been reported is
7500 µg taken for 6 years (100,101). Very high single doses can also cause transient acute
toxic symptoms that may include bulging fontanels in infants; headaches in older children and
adults; and vomiting, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, and irritability in all age groups. Rarely does
toxicity occur from ingestion of food sources of preformed vitamin A. When this occurs, it
usually results from very frequent consumption of liver products. Toxicity from food sources
of pro-vitamin A carotenoids is not reported except for the cosmetic yellowing of skin.
Infants, including newborns (105), administered single doses equivalent to 15 000–
30 000 µg retinol (50 000–100 000 IU) in oil generally show no adverse symptoms. However,
daily prophylactic or therapeutic doses should not exceed 900 µg, that is well above the mean
requirement of about 200 µg daily for infants. An excess of bulging fontanels occurred in
infants under 6 months of age in one endemically deficient population given two or more
doses of 7500 µg or 15 000 µg preformed vitamin A in oil (106,107), but other large-scale
controlled clinical trials have not reported excess bulging after three doses of 7500 µg given
with diptheria-pertussis-tetanus immunisations at about 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age (108). No
effects were detected at 3 years of age that related to transient vitamin A–induced bulging that
had occurred before 6 months of age (105,109).
Most children 1–6 years of age tolerate single oral doses of 60 000 µg (200 000 IU)
vitamin A in oil at intervals of 4–6 months without adverse symptoms (100). Occasionally
diarrhoea or vomiting is reported but is transient with no lasting sequelae. Older children
seldom experience toxic symptoms unless they habitually ingest vitamin A in excess of 7500 
µg (25 000 IU) for prolonged periods of time (100).
Mean requirement
Recommended safe intake
µg RE/day
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
101
When taken by women at early stages of gestation at daily levels of more than 7500 µ
g (25 000 IU), foetal anomalies and poor reproductive outcomes are reported (101). One
report suggests an increased risk of teratogenicity at intakes as low as 3000 µg (10 000 IU)
but this is not confirmed by other studies (102). Women who are pregnant or might become
pregnant should avoid taking excessive amounts of vitamin A. A careful review of the latest
available information by a WHO Expert Group recommended that daily intakes in excess of
3000 µg (10 000 IU) or weekly intakes in excess of 7500 µg (25 000 IU), should not be taken
at any period during gestation (102). High doses of vitamin A (60 000 µg, or 200 000 IU) can
be safely given to breast-feeding mothers for up to 2 months postpartum and for 6 weeks for
women who are not breast-feeding.
Future research 
Further research is needed:
• on the interaction of vitamin A and iron with infections, as they relate to serum levels and
disease incidence and prevalence;
• on the relation among vitamin A, iron, and zinc and their role in the severity of infections;
• on the nutritional role of 9-cis retinoic acid and the mechanism which regulates its
endogenous production;
• on the bio-availability of pro-vitamin A carotenoids from different classes of leafy and
other green and orange vegetables, tubers, and fruits as typically provided in diets (e.g.,
relative to level of fat in the diet or meal); and
• to identify a reliable indicator of vitamin A status for use in direct quantification of mean
requirements and for relating status to functions.
102 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
1. Blomhoff, R. 1991. Vitamin A metabolism: new perspectives on absorption, transport,
and storage. Physiol. Revs., 71: 951–990. 
2. Ong, D.E. 1994. Absorption of vitamin A. In: Blomhoff R, ed. Vitamin A in Health and
Disease. p. 37–72. New York, Marcel Dekker, Inc.
3. Parker, RS. Absorption, metabolism, and transport of carotenoids. FASEB J., 1996, 10:
542–551.
4. Jayarajan, P., Reddy, V. & Mohanram, M. 1980. Effect of dietary fat on absorption of 
β-carotene from green leafy vegetables in children. Indian J. Med. Res., 71: 53–56.
5. Novotny, J.A., Dueker, S.R., Zech, L.A. & Clifford, A.J. 1995. Compartmental analysis
of the dynamics of β-carotene metabolism in an adult volunteer. J. Lip. Res., 36: 1825–
1838.
6. Stephensen, C.B. 1994. Vitamin A is excreted in the urine during acute infection. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 60: 388–392.
7. Alvarez, J.O. 1995. Urinary excretion of retinol in children with acute diarrhea. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 61: 1273–1276.
8. Green, M.H. & Green, J.B. 1994. Dynamics and control of plasma retinol. In: Blomhoff
R, ed. Vitamin A in Health and Disease. P. 119-133. New York, Marcel Dekker, Inc.
9. Ross, C. & Gardner, E.M. 1994. The function of vitamin A in cellular growth and
differentiation, and its roles during pregnancy and lactation. In: Allen L, King J.,
Lönnerdal B, eds. Nutrient Regulation during Pregnancy, Lactation, and Infant Growth.
P. 187-200. New York, Plenum Press.
10. Chambon, P. 1996. A decade of molecular biology of retinoic acid receptors. FASEB J.,
10: 940–954.
11. Ross, A.C. & Stephensen, C.B. 1996. Vitamin A and retinoids in antiviral responses.
FASEB J., 10: 979–985.
12. Pemrick, S.M., Lucas, D.A. & Grippo, J.F. 1994. The retinoid receptors. Leukemia. 3:
S1-10. 
13. Rando, R.R. 1994. Retinoid isomerization reactions in the visual system. In: Blomhoff R,
ed. Vitamin A in Health and Disease. p.503–529. New York, Marcel Dekker, Inc. 
14. Eskild, L.W. &  Hansson, V. 1994. Vitamin A functions in the reproductive organs. In:
Blomhoff R, ed. Vitamin A in Health and Disease. p. 531–559.
15. Morriss-Kay, G.M.  & Sokolova, N. 1996. Embryonic development and pattern
formation. FASEB J., 10: 961–968.
16. WHO/UNICEF. Indicators of VAD and their use in monitoring intervention
programmes. WHO/NUT/96.10. pp. 66. World Health Organization, Geneva.
17. WHO. 1998. Vitamin A Deficiency (VAD) Prevalence by level of public health
significance (map) . WHO Global Database on Vitamin A Deficiency. 
18. WHO. 1995. Global prevalence of vitamin A deficiency. MDIS Working Paper #2. World
Health Organization, Geneva.
19. Katz, J. 1993. Clustering of xerophthalmia within households and villages. Int. J.
Epidemiol., 22: 709–715.
20. Sommer, A. 1994. VAD and its consequences: A field guide to their detection and
control. 3rd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1994.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
103
21. Beaton, G.H. 1993. Effectiveness of vitamin A supplementation in the control of young
child morbidity and mortality in developing countries. ACC/SCN State-of-the-art Series,
nutrition policy discussion paper no. 13. United Nations Administrative Committee on
Coordination, Subcommittee on Nutrition. Geneva, World Health Organization.
22. Sommer, A., Emran, N. & Tjakrasudjatma, S. 1980. Clinical characteristics of vitamin
A responsive and nonresponsive Bitot's spots. Am. J. Ophthalmol., 90: 160-171.
23. Bloem, M.W., Matzger, H. & Huq, N. 1994. Vitamin A deficiency among women in the
reproductive years: an ignored problem. Proceedings of the 16th IVACG Meeting, 24–28
October, 1994, Chiang Rai, Thailand.
24. Christian, P. 1998. Night blindness of pregnancy in rural Nepal—nutritional and health
risks. Int. J. Epidemiol., 27: 231–237.
25. Wallingford, J.C. & Underwood, B.A. 1986. Vitamin A deficiency in pregnancy,
lactation, and the nursing child. In: Baurenfeind JC, ed. Vitamin A deficiency and its
control. p.101–152. New York, Academic Press. 
26. Newman, V. 1994. Vitamin A and breast-feeding: a comparison of data from developed
and developing countries. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, Series: 161–176.
27. WHO. 1995. Physical status: The use and interpretation of anthropometry. Report of a
WHO Expert Committee. WHO Technical Report. Series 854. Geneva, World Health
Organization.
28. National Academy Sciences, Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. 1990.
Nutrition during pregnancy. Part II. Nutrient supplements. p. 336-341. Washington, DC,
National Academy Press.
29. Mele, L. 1991. Nutritional and household risk factors for xerophthalmia in Aceh,
Indonesia: a case-control study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,  53: 460–1465.
30. Erdman, J. Jr. 1988. The physiologic chemistry of carotenes in man. Clin. Nutr., 7:
101-106.
31. Marsh, R.R., Talukder, A., Baker, S.K. & Bloem, M.W. 1995. Improving food security
through home gardening: A case study from Bangladesh. In: Technology for rural homes:
research and extension experiences . UK, AERDD, University of Reading.
32. Sinha, D.P. & Bang, F.B. 1973. Seasonal variation in signs of vitamin A deficiency in
rural West Bengal children. Lancet, ii: 228–231.
33. Johns, T., Booth, S.L. & Kuhnlein, H.V. 1992. Factors influencing vitamin A intake and
programmes to improve vitamin A status. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 14: 20–33.
34. Tarwotjo, I. 1982. Dietary practices and xerophthalmia among Indonesian children. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 35: 574–581.
35. Zeitlan, M.F. 1992. Mothers' and children's intakes of vitamin A in rural Bangladesh. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 56: 136–147.
36. Mahadevan, I. 1961. Belief systems in food of the Telugu-speaking people of the
Telengana region. Indian J. Soc. Work,, 21: 387–396.
37. Ghana VAST study team. 1993. Vitamin A supplementation in northern Ghana: effects
on clinic attendance, hospital admissions, and child mortality. Lancet, 342: 7–12.
38. Barreto, M.L. 1994. Effect of vitamin A supplementation on diarrhoea and acute lower-
respiratory-tract infections in young children in Brazil. Lancet, 344: 228–231.
39. Bhandari, N., Bhan, M.K. & Sazawal, S. 1994. Impact of massive dose of vitamin A
given to preschool children with acute-diarrhoea on subsequent respiratory and diarrhoeal
morbidity. BMJ, 309: 1404-7.
104 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
40. Fawzi, W.W. 1993. Vitamin A supplementation and child mortality. A meta-analysis.
JAMA, 269: 898-903.
41. Glasziou, P.P. & Mackerras, D.E.M. 1993. Vitamin A supplementation in infectious
diseases: a meta-analysis. BMJ, 306: 366-70.
42. Menon, K. & Vijayaraghavan, K. 1979. Sequelae of severe xerophthalmia: a follow-up
study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 33: 218-20.
43. Hussey, G.D. & Klein, M. 1990. A randomised controlled trial of vitamin A in children
with severe measles. N. Engl. J. Med., 323: 160–164.
44. West, K.P. 1997. Impact of weekly supplementation of women with vitamin A or beta-
carotene on foetal, infant and maternal mortality in Nepal. In: Report of the XVIII
International Vitamin A Consultative Group Meeting. p. 86. 22-26 September. Cairo,
Egypt.
45. WHO. 1995. The Vitamin A and Pneumonia Working Group. Potential interventions for
the prevention of childhood pneumonia in developing countries: a meta-analysis of data
from field trials to assess the impact of vitamin A supplementation on pneumonia
morbidity and mortality. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 73: 609–619.
46. Coutsoudis, A., Broughton, M. & Coovadia, H.M. 1991. Vitamin A supplementation
reduces measles morbidity in young African children: a randomised, placebo-controlled,
double blind trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 890–895.
47. Solomons, N.W. & Keusch, G.T. 1981. Nutritional implications of parasitic infections.
Nutr. Revs., 39: 149–161.
48. Feachem, R.G. 1987. Vitamin A deficiency and diarrhoea: a review of interrelationships
and their implications for the control of xerophthalmia and diarrhoea. Tropical Disease
Bulletin, 84: R1–R16.
49. Thurnham, D.I. & Singkamani, R. 1991. The acute phase response and vitamin A status
in malaria. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 85:
194-199.
50. Campos, FACS., Flores, H. & Underwood, B.A. 1987. Effect of an infection on vitamin
A status of children as measured by the relative dose response (RDR). Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
46: 91–94.
51. Curtale, F., Pokhrel, R.P., Tilden, R.L. & Higashi, G. 1995. Intestinal helminths and
xerophthalmia in Nepal. J. Tro. Pediatr., 41: 334–337.
52. Sommer, A. & West, K.P. Jr. 1996. Infectious morbidity. In: Vitamin A Deficiency,
Health, Survival, and Vision. p.19-98. New York, Oxford University Press. 
53. Foster, A. & Yorston, D. 1992. Corneal ulceration in Tanzanian children: relationship
between measles and vitamin A deficiency. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene, 86: 54–455.
54. Arroyave, G. 1961. Serum and liver vitamin A and lipids in children with severe protein
malnutrition. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 1961, 9:180–185.
55. Bates, C.J. 1983. Vitamin A in pregnancy and lactation. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 42: 65–79.
56. Takahashi, Y. 1975. Vitamin A deficiency and foetal growth and development in the rat.
J. Nutr., 105: 1299–1310.
57. Public Affairs Committee of the Teratology Society. 1987. Teratology society position
paper: Recommendations for vitamin A use during pregnancy. Teratology, 35: 269–275.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
105
58. Underwood, B.A. 1994. The role of vitamin A in child growth, development and
survival. In: Allen L et al., eds. Regulation during pregnancy, lactation, and infant
growth. p. 195-202. New York, Plenum, 
59. IVACG. 1998.  IVACG statement on vitamin A and iron interactions. Washington, DC,
International Vitamin A Consultative Group.
60. Suharno, D. 1993. Supplementation with vitamin A and iron for nutritional anaemia in
pregnant women in West Java, Indonesia. Lancet, 342: 1325–1328.
61. Sijtsma, K.W. 1993. Iron status in rats fed on diets containing marginal amounts of
vitamin A. Br. J. Nutr., 70: 777–785.
62. FAO/WHO. 1967. Requirements of vitamin A, thiamine, riboflavine and niacin. Report of
a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Group. WHO technical report series. 362, World Health
Organization, Geneva.
63. Adams, W.R. & Green, M.H. 1994. Prediction of liver vitamin A in rats by an oral
isotope dilution technique. J. Nutr., 124: 1265–1270.
64. Furr, H.C. 1989. Vitamin A concentrations in liver determined by isotope dilution assay
with tetradeuterated vitamin A and by biopsy in generally healthy adult Humans. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 49: 713–716.
65. Haskell, M.J. 1998. Plasma kinetics of an oral dose of [2H4]retinyl acetate in Human
subjects with estimated low or high total body stores of vitamin A. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68:
90–95.
66. Van den Berg, H. & van Vliet, T. 1998. Effect of simultaneous, single oral doses of β-
carotene with lutein or lycopene on the β-carotene and retinyl ester responses in the
triacylglycerol-rich lipoprotein fraction of men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68: 82–89.
67. Castenmiller, J.J. & West, C.E. 1998. Bio-availability and bioconversion of carotenoids.
Ann. Rev. Nutr., 18: 19–38.
68. Parker, R.S. et al. 1999. Bio-availability of carotenoids in Human subjects. Proc. Nutr.
Soc., 58 :1–8.
69. FAO/WHO. 1988. Requirements of vitamin A, iron, folate and vitamin B12. Report of a
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization.
70. Rodriguez-Amaya, DB. 1997. Carotenoids and food preparation: the retention of pro-
vitamin A carotenoids in prepared, processed, and stored foods.  Arlington, VA, John
Snow, Inc./OMNI Project.
71. Booth, S.L., Johns, T. & Kuhnlein, H.V. 1992. Natural food sources of vitamin A and
pro-vitamin A. UNU Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 14: 6–19.
72. Burití Palm. 1975. In: Report, Ad Hoc Panel of the Advisory Committee on Technology
Innovations, Board on Science and Technology for International Development,
Commission on International Relations. Underexploited tropical plants with promising
economic value. P. 133-137. Washington, DC, National Academy Sciences. 
73. Vuong, L.T. 1997. An indigenous fruit of North Vietnam with an exceptionally high
ß-carotene content. p. 2. Sight and Life Newsletter.
74. IVACG. 1989. Report of the International Vitamin A Consultative Group. Guidelines for
the development of a simplified dietary assessment to identify groups at risk for
inadequate intake of vitamin A. Washington, DC, International Life Sciences Institute-
Nutrition Foundation.
75. Périssé, J. & Polacchi, W. 1980. Geographical distribution and recent changes in world
supply of vitamin A. Food and Nutrition, 6: 21–27.
106 
Chapter 7: Vitamin A
76. ACC/SCN. Second report on the world nutrition situation. Vol.1. Global and regional
results, October 1992. Vol. 2, March 1993. 
77. US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. 1998. Food and
Nutrient Intakes by Individuals in the United States, by Sex and Age, 1994-96, pp. 197.
Nationwide Food Surveys Report No. 96-2.
78. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1998. National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey III, 1988-1994. CD-ROM Series 11, No. 2A, April 1998. Hyatsville,
MD.
79. Gregory, J., Foster, K., Tyler, H. & Wiseman, M. 1990. The Dietary and Nutritionl
Survey of British Adults. London, HMSO.
80. Tyler, H.A., Day, M.J.L. & Rose, H.J. 1991. Vitamin A and pregnancy [letter]. Lancet,
337:48–49.
81. Bloem, M.W., de Pee, S. & Darnton-Hill, I. 1997. Vitamin A deficiency in India,
Bangladesh and Nepal. In: Gillespie S, ed. Malnutrition in South Asia. A regional profile.
p.125–144. UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia. 
82. de Pee, S. 1995. Lack of improvement in vitamin A status with increased consumption of
dark-green leafy vegetables. Lancet, 346: 75–81.
83. Yin, S. 1998. Green and yellow vegetables rich in pro-vitamin A carotenoids can sustain
vitamin A status in children. FASEB J., 12: A351.
84. Jalal, F. 1998. Serum retinol concentrations in children are affected by food sources of β-
carotene, fat intake, and anthelmintic drug treatment. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68: 623-9.
85. Christian, P. 1998. Working after the sun goes down. Exploring how night blindness
impairs women’s work activities in rural Nepal. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 52: 519–524. 
86. Underwood, B.A. & Olson, J.A., eds. 1993. A brief guide to current methods of
assessing vitamin A status. A report of the International Vitamin A Consultative Group
(IVACG). Washington, DC, Nutrition Foundation.
87. Sommer, A. History of nightblindness: a simple tool for xerophthalmia screening. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr.,1980, 33:887–891.
88. Underwood, B.A. 1990. Biochemical and histological methodologies for assessing
vitamin A status in Human populations. In: Packer L, ed. Methods in Enzymology:
Retinoids, Part B. pp. 242–250.New York, Academic Press.
89. Olson, J.A.  1992. Measurement of vitamin A status. Voeding, 53: 163–167.
90. Sommer, A. & Muhilal. 1982. Nutritional factors in corneal xerophthalmia and
keratomalacia. Arch. Ophthalmol., 100: 399–403.
91. Wachtmeister, L. 1988. Attempts to define the minimal serum level of vitamin A
required for normal visual function in a patient with severe fat malabsorption. Acta
Ophthalmol., 66: 341–348.
92. Flores, H. 1984. Assessment of marginal vitamin A deficiency in Brazilian children using
the relative dose response procedure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 40: 1281–1289.
93. Flores, H. 1991. Serum vitamin A distribution curve for children aged 2–6 y known to
have adequate vitamin A status: a reference population. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 707–711.
94. Pilch, S.M., ed. 1987. Analysis of vitamin A data from the health and nutrition
examination surveys. J. Nutr., 117: 636–640.
95. Christian, P., Schulze, K., Stoltzfus, R.J., West, K.P. Jr. 1998. Hyporetinolemia, illness
symptoms, and acute phase protein response in pregnant women with and without night
blindness. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67: 1237–1243.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
107
96. Filteau, S.M. 1993. Influence of morbidity on serum retinol of children in a community-
based study in northern Ghana. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 58: 192–197.
97. WHO/UNICEF/ORSTOM/UC Davis. 1998. Complementary feeding of young children
in developing countries: a review of current scientific knowledge. Pp.228.
WHO/NUT/98.1. Geneva, World Health Organization. 
98. Rahmathullah, L. Reduced mortality among children in Southern India receiving a small
weekly dose of vitamin A. N. Engl. J. Med., 323: 929–935.
99. Miller, R.K. 1998. Periconceptional vitamin A use: How much is teratogenic?
Reproductive Toxicology, 12: 75–88.
100. Hathcock, J.N. Evaluation of vitamin A toxicity. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 52: 183–202.
101. Hathcock, J.N. 1997. Vitamins and minerals: efficacy and safety. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66:
427–437.
102. WHO. 1998. Safe vitamin A dosage during pregnancy and lactation. pp.34.
WHO/NUT/98.4. Geneva, World Health Organization.
103. Karr, M. 1997. Age-specific reference intervals for plasma vitamin A, E and beta-
carotene and for serum zinc, retinol-binding protein and prealbumin for Sydney children
aged 9-62 months. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res., 67: 432–436.
104. Smith, F.R. & Goodman, D.S. 1976.Vitamin A transport in Human vitamin A toxicity.
N. Engl. J. Med., 294: 805–808. 
105. Humphrey, J.H. 1998. Neonatal vitamin A supplementation: effect on development and
growth at 3 y of age. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68: 109–117. 
106. Baqui, A.H. 1995. Bulging fontanelle after supplementation with 25,000 IU vitamin A in
infancy using immunisation contacts. Acta Paediatrica, 84: 863–866.
107. de Francisco, A. 1993. Acute toxicity of vitamin A given with vaccines in infancy.
Lancet, 342: 526–527.
108. WHO/CHD Immunisation-Linked Vitamin A Supplementation Study Group. 1998.
Randomised trial to assess benefits and safety of vitamin A supplementation linked to
immunisation in early infancy. Lancet, 352: 1257–1263.
109. Van Dillen, J., de Francisco, A., & Ovenrweg-Plandsoen, W.C.G. 1996. Long-term
effect of vitamin A with vaccines. Lancet, 347:1705.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
109
Summary of the role of vitamin D in human metabolic processes
V
itamin D is required to maintain normal blood levels of calcium and phosphate, that
are in turn needed for the normal mineralisation of bone, muscle contraction, nerve
conduction, and general cellular function in all cells of the body. Vitamin D achieves
this after its conversion to the active form 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25-(OH)2D], or
calcitriol. This active form regulates the transcription of a number of vitamin D–dependent
genes coding for calcium-transporting proteins and bone matrix proteins.
Vitamin D also modulates the transcription of cell cycle proteins, that decrease cell
proliferation and increase cell differentiation of a number of specialised cells of the body
(e.g., osteoclastic precursors, enterocytes, keratinocytes, etc.). This property may explain the
actions of vitamin D in bone resorption, intestinal calcium transport, and skin. Vitamin D also
possesses immuno-modulatory properties that may alter responses to infections in vivo. The
cell differentiating and immuno-modulatory properties underlie the reason why vitamin D
derivatives are now used successfully in the treatment of psoriasis and other skin disorders.
Clinical assays measure 1,25-(OH)2D2 and 1,25-(OH)2D3, collectively called
1,25-(OH)2D. Similarly, calcidiol is measured as 25-OH-D but it is a mixture of 25-OH-D2
and 25-OH-D3. For the purposes of this document, 1,25-(OH)2D and 25-OH-D will be used to
refer to calcitriol and calcidiol, respectively.
Overview of the role of vitamin D 
Vitamin D, a seco-steroid, can either be made in the skin from a cholesterol-like precursor (7-
dehydrocholesterol) by exposure to sunlight or can be provided pre-formed in the diet (1). The
version made in the skin is referred to as vitamin D3 whereas the dietary form can be vitamin
D3 or a closely related molecule of plant origin known as vitamin D2 . Because vitamin D can
be made in the skin, it should not strictly be called a vitamin, and some nutritional texts refer
to the substance as a prohormone and to the two forms as cholecalciferol (D3) or
ergocalciferol (D2).
From a nutritional perspective, the two forms are metabolised similarly in humans, are
equal in potency, and can be considered equivalent. It is now firmly established that vitamin
D3 is metabolised first in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin-D (25-OH-D or calcidiol) (2) and
subsequently in the kidneys to 1,25-(OH)2D (3) to produce a biologically active hormone. The
1,25-(OH)2D, like all vitamin D metabolites, is present in the blood complexed to vitamin D
binding protein, a specific α-globulin. The 1,25-(OH)2D is believed to act on target cells
similarly to the way a steroid hormone would act. Free hormone crosses the plasma
membrane and interacts with a specific nuclear receptor known as the vitamin D receptor, a
DNA-binding, zinc-finger protein with a molecular weight of 55,000 (4). This ligand-receptor
complex binds to a specific vitamin D–responsive element and, with associated transcription
factors (e.g., retinoid X receptor), enhances transcription of mRNAs which code for calcium-
transporting proteins, bone matrix proteins, or cell cycle–regulating proteins (5). As a result of
these processes ,1,25-(OH)2D stimulates intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate and
mobilises calcium and phosphate by stimulating bone resorption (6). These functions serve
Chapter 8
Vitamin D
110
    Chapter 8:  Vitamin D
the common purpose of restoring blood levels of calcium and phosphate to normal when
concentrations of the two ions are low.
Lately, interest has focused on other cellular actions of 1,25-(OH)2D. With the
discovery of 1,25-(OH)2D receptors in many classical non-target tissues such as brain, various
bone marrow–derived cells, skin, thymus, etc. (7), the view has been expressed that
1,25-(OH)2D induces fusion and differentiation of macrophages (8, 9). This effect has been
widely interpreted to mean that the natural role of 1,25-(OH)2D is to induce
osteoclastogenesis from colony forming units–granulatory monocytes in the bone marrow.
The 1,25-(OH)2D also suppresses interleukin 2 production in activated T lymphocytes (10,
11), an effect which suggests the hormone might play a role in immuno-modulation in vivo.
Other tissues (e.g., skin) are directly affected by exogenous administration of vitamin D,
though the physiologic significance of these effects is poorly understood. The pharmacologic
effects of 1,25-(OH)2D are profound and have resulted in the development of vitamin D
analogues, that are approved for use in hyper-proliferative conditions such as psoriasis (12).
In calcium homeostasis 1,25-(OH)2D works in conjunction with parathyroid hormone
(PTH) to produce its beneficial effects on the plasma levels of ionised calcium and phosphate
(5, 13). The physiologic loop (Figure 10) starts with calcium sensing by the calcium receptor
of the parathyroid gland (14). When the level of ionised calcium in plasma falls, PTH is
secreted by the parathyroid gland and stimulates the tightly regulated renal enzyme 25-OH-D-
1-α-hydroxylase to make more 1,25-(OH)2D from the large circulating pool of 25-OH-D. The
resulting increase in 1,25-(OH)2D (with the rise in PTH) causes an increase in calcium
transport within the intestine, bone, and kidney. All these events raise plasma calcium levels
back to normal, that in turn is sensed by the calcium receptor of the parathyroid gland. The
further secretion of PTH is turned off not only by the feedback action of calcium, but also by
a short feedback loop involving 1,25-(OH)2D directly suppressing PTH synthesis in the
parathyroid gland (not shown in figure).
Figure 10
Source: Adapted from Jones et al. (13).
Calcium homeostasis
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
111
Although this model oversimplifies the events involved in calcium homeostasis it is
easy to see from it that sufficient 25-OH-D must be available to provide adequate 1,25-
(OH)2D synthesis and hence an adequate level of plasma calcium and that vitamin D
deficiency will result in inadequate 25-OH-D and 1,25-(OH)2D synthesis, inadequate calcium
homeostasis, and a constantly elevated PTH level (termed: secondary hyperparathyroidism).
It becomes evident from this method of presentation of the role of vitamin D that the
nutritionist can focus on the plasma levels of 25-OH-D and PTH to gain an insight into
vitamin D status. Not shown but also important is the endpoint of the physiologic action of
vitamin D, namely adequate plasma calcium and phosphate ions, that provide the raw
materials for bone mineralisation.
Populations at risk for vitamin D deficiency
Infants
Infants constitute a population at risk for vitamin D deficiency because of relatively large
vitamin D needs brought about by their high rate of skeletal growth. At birth, infants have
acquired in utero the vitamin D stores that must carry them through the first months of life. A
recent survey of French neonates revealed that 64 percent had 25-OH-D values below 30
nmol/l, the lower limit of the normal range (15). Breast-fed infants are particularly at risk
because of the low concentrations of vitamin D in human milk (16). This problem is further
compounded in some infants fed human milk by a restriction in exposure to ultraviolet (UV)
light for seasonal, latitudinal, cultural, or social reasons. Infants born in the autumn months at
extremes of latitude are particularly at risk because they spend the first 6 months of their life
indoors and therefore have little opportunity to synthesise vitamin D in their skin during this
period. Consequently, although vitamin D deficiency is rare in developed countries, sporadic
cases of rickets are still being reported in many northern cities but almost always in infants
fed human milk (17-20).
Infant formulas are supplemented with vitamin D at levels ranging from 40
international units (IUs) or 1 µg /418.4 kJ to 100 IU or 2.5 µg /418.4 kJ, that provide
approximately between 6 µg and 15 µg of vitamin D, respectively. These amounts of dietary
vitamin D are sufficient to prevent rickets.
Adolescents 
Another period of rapid growth of the skeleton occurs at puberty and increases the need not
for the vitamin D itself, but for the active form 1,25-(OH)2D. This need results from the
increased conversion of 25-OH-D to 1,25-(OH)2D in adolescents (21). Furthermore, unlike
infants, adolescents are usually outdoors and therefore usually are exposed to UV light
sufficient for synthesising vitamin D for their needs. Excess production of vitamin D in the
summer and early fall months is stored mainly in the adipose tissue (22) and is available to
sustain high growth rates in the winter months that follow. Insufficient vitamin D stores
during these periods of increased growth can lead to vitamin D insufficiency (23).
Elderly
Over the past 20 years, clinical research studies of the basic biochemical machinery handling
vitamin D have suggested an age-related decline in many key steps of vitamin D action (24)
including rate of skin synthesis, rate of hydroxylation leading to activation to the hormonal
form, and response of target tissues (e.g., bone) as well as reduced skin exposure (25). Not
surprisingly a number of independent studies from around the world have shown that there
appears to be vitamin D deficiency in a subset of the elderly population, as characterised by
low blood levels of 25-OH-D coupled with elevations of plasma PTH and alkaline
112
    Chapter 8:  Vitamin D
phosphatase (26). There is evidence that this vitamin D deficiency contributes to declining
bone mass and increases the incidence of hip fractures (27). Although some of these studies
may exaggerate the extent of the problem by focusing on institutionalised individuals or
in-patients with decreased sun exposures, in general they have forced health professionals to
re-address the intakes of this segment of society and look at potential solutions to correct the
problem. Several groups have found that modest increases in vitamin D intakes (between 10
and 20 µg/day) reduce the rate of bone loss and the fracture rate (25-29).
These findings have led agencies and researchers to suggest an increase in recommended
vitamin D intakes for the elderly from the suggested 2.5–5 µg /day to a value that is able to
maintain normal 25-OH-D levels in the elderly, such as 10–15 µg/day. This vitamin D intake
results in lower rates of bone loss and is suggested for the middle-aged (50–70 years) and
old-aged (>70 years) populations (33). The increased requirements are justified mainly on the
grounds of the reduction in skin synthesis of vitamin D, a linear reduction occurring in both
men and women, that begins with the thinning of the skin at age 20 years (24).
Pregnancy and lactation 
Elucidation of the changes in calciotropic hormones occurring during pregnancy and lactation
has revealed a role for vitamin D in the former but probably not the latter. Even in pregnancy,
the changes in vitamin D metabolism which occur, namely an increase in the maternal plasma
levels of 1,25-(OH)2D (34) due to a putative placental synthesis of the hormone (35), do not
seem to impinge greatly on the maternal vitamin D requirements. The concern that modest
vitamin D supplementation might be deleterious to the foetus is not justified. Furthermore,
because transfer of vitamin D from mother to foetus is important for establishing the
newborn’s growth rate, the goal of ensuring adequate vitamin D status with conventional
prenatal vitamin D supplements probably should not be discouraged.
In lactating women there appears to be no direct role for vitamin D because increased
calcium needs are regulated by PTH-related peptide (36, 37), and recent studies have failed to
show any change in vitamin D metabolites during lactation (38, 39). As stated above, the
vitamin D content of human milk is low (16). Consequently, there is no great drain on
maternal vitamin D reserves either to regulate calcium homeostasis or to supply the need of
human milk. Because human milk is a poor source of vitamin D, rare cases of nutritional
rickets are still found, but these are almost always in breast-fed babies deprived of sunlight
exposure (17-20). Furthermore, there is little evidence that increasing calcium or vitamin D
supplements to lactating mothers results in an increased transfer of calcium or vitamin D in
milk (38). Thus, the current thinking, based on a clearer understanding of the role of vitamin
D in lactation, is that there is little purpose in recommending additional vitamin D for
lactating women. The goal for mothers who breast-feed their infants seems to be merely to
ensure good nutrition and sunshine exposure in order to ensure normal vitamin D status
during the perinatal period.
Hip fractures 43% ; non-vertebral
BMD; no change in whole-body
proximal femur 2.7% in vitamin
Reduced late wintertime bone
loss from vertebrae; net spine
in subset (n=56), BMD of
(years)
Resultsa
fractures 32%;
BMD.
Mean SD
Regimen
Duration
1.0
1.5
Randomised, controlled trials with dietary vitamin D supplements
1200 mg calcium
10 µg vitamin D
+
20 µg vitamin D
+
400 mg calcium
0.5
6
(years)
Age
62
84
3270
249
Reference
Study Group
n b
Healthy, post-menopausal women
Healthy, elderly women living in
nursing homes or in apartments
living independently
for the elderly
Dawson-Hughes et al., 1991
Chapuy et al., 1992 (29)
Table 19
(28)
than in 2.5 µg group (-2.54%); no
Hip fractures 29%; non-vertebral
Loss of BMD from femoral neck
lower in 17.5µg group (-1.06%)
incidence; in subset (n=248) of
D group and 4.6% in placebo
women from nursing homes,
difference in BMD at spine.
BMD 2.3% after 2 years.
No difference in fracture
fractures 24%.
group.
3.0
2.0
2.5 µg or 17.5 µg
vitamin D
10 µg vitamin D
500 mg calcium
5
6
64
80
2578
(1916-Fem.)
(662-Male)
261
Healthy post-menopausal women
independently, in nursing homes,
or in apartments for the elderly
c Same study as Chapuy et al. (29) after further 1.5 years of treatment.
Healthy elderly living
living independently
Source: Adapted with permission from Shearer (25).
b Number of subjects enrolled in the study.
Dawson-Hughes et al., 1995
Chapuy et al., 1994 (30) c
a  ↑ Increase;  ↓  decrease.
Lips et al., 1996 (32)
(31)
114                                                                                                            Chapter 8:  Vitamin D
Evidence used for estimating recommended vitamin D intake
Lack of accuracy in estimating dietary intake and skin synthesis 
The unique problem of estimating total intake of a substance that can be provided in the diet
or made in the skin by exposure to sunlight makes it difficult to estimate adequate total
intakes of vitamin D for the general population. Accurate food composition data are not
available for vitamin D, accentuating the difficulty for estimating dietary intakes. Whereas
this has led two recent US national surveys to avoid attempting this task, the second National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II) estimated vitamin D intakes to be 2.9
µg/day and 2.3 µg/day for younger and older women, respectively. A recent study of elderly
women by Kinyamu et al. (40) concurred with this assessment, finding an intake of 3.53 µ
g/day.
Skin synthesis is equally difficult to estimate, being affected by such imponderables as
age, season, latitude, time of day, skin exposure, sun screen use, etc. In vitamin D – replete
individuals, estimates of skin synthesis are put at around 10 µg /day (24, 41), with total
intakes estimated at 15 µg/day (24).
Use of plasma 25-OH-D as a measure of vitamin D status 
Numerous recent studies have used plasma 25-OH-D as a measure of vitamin D status, and
there is a strong presumptive relationship of this variable with bone status. Thus, it is not
surprising that several nutritional committees (e.g., the Food and Nutrition Board of the US
National Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Medicine in conjunction with Health Canada)
have chosen to use a biochemical basis for estimating required intakes and used these
estimates to derive recommended intakes (33). The method used involved the estimation of
the mean group dietary intake of vitamin D required to maintain the plasma 25-OH-D levels
above 27 nmol/l, that is necessary to ensure normal bone health. Previously, many studies had
established 27 nmol/l as the lower limit of the normal range (e.g., NHANES III [41]). This
dietary intake of vitamin D for each population group was rounded to the nearest 50 IU (1.25
µg) and then doubled to cover the needs of all individuals within that group irrespective of
sunlight exposure. They termed this amount adequate intake (AI) and used it in place of
recommended dietary allowance (RDA), that had been used by US agencies since 1941. We
are recommending the use of those figures here as recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs)
because it is an entirely logical approach to estimating the vitamin D needs for the whole
population.
Table 20
Preliminary unweighted results from NHANES III dataa
Percentile
ng/ml
1st
7.6
10.9
13.2
24.4
40.1
45.9
59.0
aTotal number of samples used in data analysis: 18,323; mean 25-OH-D value for United States: 25.89  ng/ml
(+/- 11.08). Frequency distribution of serum or plasma 25-OH-D. Values for all ages, ethnicity  groups, both
sexes.bHigh values: four values 90-98 ng/ml, one value of 160.3 ng/ml. Values < 5 ng/ml (lowest standard)
entered arbitrarily in the database as "3".  Source: NHANES III (42).
5th
10th
50th
90th
95th
99th
25-OH-Db
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     115
Because study after study had been recommending increases in vitamin D intakes for
the elderly, it might have been expected that the proposed increases in suggested intakes from
5 µg/day (RDAs in the United States [43], RNIs in Canada [44]) to 10 µg/day or 15 µg/day
(AI) would be welcomed. However, a recent editorial in a prominent medical journal attacked
the recommendations as being too conservative (45). This came on the heels of an article in
the same journal (46) reporting the level of hypovitaminosis D to be as high as 57 percent in a
population of ageing (mean 62 years) medical in-patients in the Boston area.
Of course, such in-patients are by definition sick and should not be used to calculate
normal intakes. Indeed, the new NHANES III study (42) of 18 323 normal individuals from
all regions of the United States suggests that approximately 5 percent had values of 25-OH-D
below 27 nmol/l (47) (Table 20). Although the data are skewed by sampling biases that
favour sample collection in the southern states in winter months and northern states in the
summer months, even subsets of data collected in northern states in September give the
incidence of low 25-OH-D in the elderly in the 6–18 percent range (47) as compared with 57
percent in the institutionalized in-patient population (43). Ideally, such measurements of the
normal population should be made at the end of the winter months and before UV irradiation
has reached a strength sufficient to allow skin synthesis of vitamin D. Thus, the NHANES III
study may still underestimate the incidence of hypovitaminosis D in a northern elderly
population in winter. Nevertheless, in lieu of additional studies of selected human
populations, it would seem that the recommendations of the Food and Nutrition Board are
reasonable guidelines for vitamin D intakes, at least for the near future. This considered
approach allows for a period of time to monitor the potential shortfalls of the new
recommendations as well as to assess whether the suggested guidelines can be attained, a
point that was repeatedly stated about the RDAs.
Considerations in viewing recommended intakes for vitamin D 
In recommending intakes for vitamin D, it must be recognised that in most locations in the
world in a broad band around the equator (between latitudes 42oN and 42oS), the most
physiologically relevant and efficient way of acquiring vitamin D is to synthesise it
endogenously in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol by sun (UV) light exposure. In most
situations, approximately 30 minutes of skin exposure (without sunscreen) of the arms and
face to sunlight can provide all the daily vitamin D needs of the body (24). However, skin
synthesis of vitamin D is negatively influenced by factors which may reduce the ability of the
skin to provide the total needs of the individual (24):
• latitude and season – both influence the amount of UV light reaching the skin; 
• the ageing process – thinning of the skin reduces the efficiency of this synthetic
process;
• skin pigmentation: the presence in the skin of darker pigments interferes with UV light
reaching the appropriate layer of the skin;
• clothing – virtually complete covering of the skin for medical, social, cultural, or
religious reasons leaves insufficient skin exposed to sunlight; and
• sunscreen use – widespread and liberal use of sun-blockers reduces skin damage by the
sun but also deleteriously affects synthesis of vitamin D.
Because not all of these problems can be solved in all geographic locations,
particularly during winter at latitudes higher than 42o where synthesis is virtually zero, it is
116                                                                                                            Chapter 8:  Vitamin D
recommended that individuals not synthesising vitamin D should correct their vitamin D
status by consuming the amounts of vitamin D appropriate for their age group (Table 21).
Summary of the RNIs for vitamin D by age group
Table 21
RNIs for vitamin D according to age groups
RNI
 µg/day
 Infants
 
   0–6 months
 5
   7–12 months
 5
   1–3 years
 5
   4–6 years
 5
   7–9 years
 5
 Adolescents, 10–18 years
 5
 Adults
Age group
19–50 years
 5
   Older adults, 51–65 years
 10
   Elderly adults, 65+ years
 15
 Pregnant women
 5
 Lactating women
 5
 aUnits: for vitamin D, 1 IU = 25 ng, 40 IU = 1 µg, 200 IU = 5 µg, 400 IU = 10 µg, 
 600 IU = 15 µg, 800 IU = 20 µg; for 25-OH-D, 1 ng/ml = 2.5 nmol/l, 
 10 ng/ml = 25 nmol/l, 11 ng/ml= 28.5 nmol/l (low limit), 
 30 ng/ml = 75 nmol/l (normal), 60 ng/ml = 150 nmol/l (upper limit).
Vitamin D toxicity
The adverse effects of high vitamin D intakes – hypercalciuria and hypercalcemia – do not
occur at these new recommended intake levels. In fact, it is worth noting that the
recommended intakes for all age groups are still well below the lowest observed adverse
effect level of 50 µg/day and have not yet even reached the no observed adverse effect level
of 20 µg/day (33, 48). Outbreaks of idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia in the United Kingdom
in the post–World War II era led to the withdrawal of vitamin D fortification from all foods in
that country because of concerns that they were due to hypervitaminosis D. There are some
suggestions in the literature that these outbreaks of idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia may
have been multifactorial with genetic and dietary components and were not just due to
technical problems with over-fortification as was assumed (49,50). In retrospect, the
termination of the vitamin D fortification may have been counter productive because it
exposed segments of the UK community to vitamin deficiency and may have discouraged
other nations from starting vitamin D fortification programmes (50). This is all the more
cause for concern because hypovitaminosis D is still a problem worldwide, particularly in
developing countries at high latitudes and in countries where skin exposure to sunlight is
discouraged (51).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     117
Future research
Further research is needed to determine:
• whether vitamin D supplements during pregnancy have any positive effects later in life;
• whether vitamin D has a role in lactation; 
• the long-term effects of higher vitamin D intakes; 
• whether dietary vitamin D supplements are as good as exposure to UV light; and
• whether vitamin D is only needed for regulation of calcium and phosphate.
118                                                                                                            Chapter 8:  Vitamin D
1. Feldman, D., Glorieux, F.H. & Pike, J.W. 1997. Vitamin D, Academic Press.
2. Blunt, J.W., DeLuca, H.F. & Schnoes, H.K. 1968. 25-hydroxycholecalciferol. A
biologically active metabolite of vitamin D3. Biochem., 7: 3317-3322.
3. Fraser, D.R. & Kodicek, E. 1970. Unique biosynthesis by kidney of a biologically active
vitamin D metabolite. Nature, 228: 764-766.
4. Haussler, M.R. 1986. Vitamin D receptors: nature and function. Ann. Revs. Nutr., 6:
527-562.
5. Jones, G., Strugnell, S. & DeLuca, H.F. 1998. Current understanding of the molecular
actions of vitamin D. Physiol. Revs., 78: 1193-1231.
6. DeLuca, H.F.1988. The vitamin D story: a collaborative effort of basic science and clinical
medicine. FASEB J., 2 : 224-236.
7. Pike, J.W. 1991. Vitamin D3 receptors: Structure and function in transcription. Ann. Revs.
Nutr., 11: 189-216.
8. Abe, E., Miyaura, C., Tanaka, H., Shiina, Y., Kuribayashi, T., Suda, S., Nishii, Y.,
DeLuca, H.F.  & Suda, T. 1983. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 promotes fusion of mouse
alveolar macrophages both by a direct mechanism and by a spleen cell-mediated indirect
mechanism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A, 80: 5583-5587.
9. Bar-Shavit, Z., Teitelbaum, S.L., Reitsma, P., Hall, A., Pegg, L.E., Trial, J. & Kahn, A.J.
1983. Induction of monocytic differentiation and bone resorption by 1á,25- dihydroxyvitamin
D3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A, 80: 5907-5911.
10. Bhalla, A.K., Amento, E.P., Clemens, T., Holick, M.F. & Krane, S.M. 1983. Specific high
affinity receptors for 1,25-dihydroxvitamin D3 in Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells:
presence in monocytes and induction in T lymphocytes following activation J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metab., 57: 1308-1310.
11. Tsoukas, C.D. Provvedini, D.M. & Manolagas, S.C. 1984. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3: A
novel immunoregulatory hormone. Science, 224: 1438-1440.
12. Kragballe, K. 1992. Vitamin D analogs in the treatment of psoriasis. J. Cell. Biochem., 49:
46-52.
13. Jones, G. & DeLuca, H.F. 1988. HPLC of vitamin D and its metabolites. In: "High
Performance Liquid Chromatography and its Application to Endocrinology". Eds. Makin,
H.L.J. and Newton, R. Monographs on Endocrinology, Vol.30. p.95-139. Berlin. Springer-
Verlag, 
14. Brown, E.M. Pollak, M. & Hebert, S.C. 1998. The extracellular calcium-sensing receptor:
its role in health and disease. Annu. Rev. Med., 49: 15-29.
15. Zeghund, F., Vervel, C., Guillozo, H., Walrant-Debray, O., Boutignon, H. &
Garabedian, M. 1997. Subclinical vitamin D deficiency in neonates: definition and response
to vitamin D supplements. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 65:771-778.
16. Specker, B.L., Tsang, R.C. & Hollis, B.W. 1985. Effect of race and diet on Human milk
vitamin D and 25-hydroxyvitamin D Am. J. Dis. Child., 139: 1134-1137.
17. Pettifor, J.M. & Daniels, E.D. 1997. Vitamin D deficiency and nutritional rickets in
children. In: Vitamin D, Feldman D, Glorieux FH, Pike JW. P. 663-678. Academic Press. 
18. Binet, A. & Kooh, S.W. 1996. Persistence of vitamin D deficiency rickets in Toronto in the
1990s. Can. J. Public Health, 87: 227-230.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     119
19. Brunvand, L. &  Nordshus, T. 1996. Nutritional rickets–an old disease with new relevance.
Nord. Med., 111: 219-221.
20. Gessner, B.D., deSchweinitz E., Petersen K.M. & Lewandowski C. 1997. Nutritional
rickets among breast-fed black and Alaska Native children. Alaska Med., 39: 72-74. 
21. Aksnes, L. & Aarskog, D. 1982. Plasma concentrations of vitamin D metabolites at puberty:
Effect of sexual maturationand implications for growth. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 55:
94-101.
22. Mawer, E.B., Backhouse, J., Holman, C.A., Lumb, G.A. & Stanbury, D.W. 1972. The
distribution and storage of vitamin D and its metabolites in Human tissues. Clin. Sci., 43:
413-431.
23. Gultekin, A., Ozalp, I., Hasanoglu, A. & Unal, A. 1987. Serum 25-hydroxycholecalciferol
levels in children and adolescents. Turk. J. Pediatr., 29: 155-162.
24. Holick, M.F. 1994. McCollum award lecture, 1994: Vitamin D-new horizons for the 21st
century. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 60: 619-630.
25. Shearer, M.J. 1997.The roles of vitamins D and K in bone health and osteoporosis
prevention. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 56:915-937.
26. Chapuy, M-C. & Meunier, P.J. 1997. Vitamin D insufficiency in adults and the elderly. In:
Vitamin D, Feldman D, Glorieux FH, Pike JW. P. 679-693.  Academic Press.
27. Dawson-Hughes, B., Harris, S.S., Krall, E.A. & Dallal, G.E. 1997. Effect of calcium and
vitamin D supplementation on bone density in men and women 65 years of age or older. N.
Engl. J. Med., 337: 670-676.
28. Dawson-Hughes B., Dallal G.E., Krall E.A., Harris S., Sokoll, L.J. & Falconer G. 1991.
Effect of vitamin D supplementation on wintertime and overall bone loss in healthy
postmenopausal women. Ann. Intern. Med., 115: 505-512.
29. Chapuy, M-C, Arlot, M.E. & Duboeuf, F.  1992.Vitamin D3 and calcium prevent hip
fractures in elderly women. N. Engl. J. Med., 327: 1637-1642.
30. Chapuy, M-C., Arlot, M.E., Delmans, P.D. & Meunier, P.J. 1994. Effect of calcium and
cholecalciferol treatment for three years on hip fractures in elderly women. BMJ, 308:
1081-1082.
31. Dawson-Hughes, Harris, S.S., Krall, E.A., Dallal, G.E., Falconer, G. & Green, C.L.
1995. Rates of bone loss in postmenopausal women randomly assigned to one of two dosages
of vitamin D. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 61: 1140-1145.
32. Lips, P., Graafmans, W.C., Ooms, M.E., Bezemer, P.D. & Bouter, L.M. 1996. Vitamin D
supplementation and fracture incidence in elderly persons: a randomised, placebo-controlled
clinical trial. Ann. Internal Med., 124: 400-406.
33. National Academy of Sciences. 1997. Report on Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium,
Phosphorus, Magnesium and Vitamin D, Food & Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine, US
National Academy of Sciences. P. 7.1-7.30. . National Academy Press.
34. Bouillon, R., Van Assche, F.A., Van Baelen, H., Heyns, W. & De Moor, P. 1981. Influence
of the vitamin D-binding protein on the serum concentration of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3.
Significance of the free 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 concentration. J. Clin. Invest., 67:
589-596.
35. Delvin, E.E., Arabian, A., Glorieux, F.H. & Mamer, O.A. 1985. In vitro metabolism of
25-hydroxycholecalciferol by isolated cells from Human decidua. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.,
60: 880-885.
120                                                                                                            Chapter 8:  Vitamin D
36. Sowers, M.F., Hollis, B.W., Shapiro, B., Randolph, J., Janney, C.A., Zhang, D., Schork,
A., Crutchfield, M., Stanczyk, F. & Russell-Aulet, M. 1996. Elevated parathyroid hormone-
related peptide associated with lactation and bone density loss. JAMA, 276(7): 549-54 
37. Prentice, A. 1998. Calcium requirements of breast-feeding mothers. Nutr. Revs., 56: 124-127.
38. Sowers, M., Zhang, D., Hollis, B.W., Shapiro, B., Janney, C.A., Crutchfield, M., Schork,
M.A., Stanczyk, F. & Randolph, J. 1998. Role of calciotrophic hormones in calcium
mobilisation of lactation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67 (2): 284-91.
39. Kovacs, C.S. & Kronenberg, H.M. 1997. Maternal-Foetal calcium and bone metabolism
during pregnancy, puerperium, and lactation. Endocr. Rev., 18: 832-72.
40. Kinyamu, H.K., Gallagher, J.C., Rafferty, K.A. & Balhorn, K.E. 1998. Dietary calcium
and vitamin D intake in elderly women: effect on serum parathyroid hormone and vitamin D
metabolites. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67: 342-348.
41. Fraser, D.R. 1983. The physiological economy of vitamin D. Lancet, I: 969-972. 
42. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1998. National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey III, 1988-1994. CD-ROM Series 11, No. 2A. Hyatsville, MD.
43. National Research Council. 1989. Recommended Dietary Allowances 10th Edition. Report
of the Subcommittee on the Tenth Edition of the RDA, Food and Nutrition Board and the
Commission on Life Sciences . Washington DC: National Academy Press .
44. Health and Welfare Canada. 1990. Nutrition Recommendations. P. 90-93. Ottawa, ON
Canada. Published by Health and Welfare Canada.
45. Utiger, R.D. 1998. The need for more vitamin D. N. Engl. J. Med., 338: 828-829.
46. Thomas, M.K., Lloyd-Jones, D.M., Thadhani, R.I., Shaw, A.C., Deraska, D.J., Kitch,
B.T., Vamvakas, E.C. Dick, I.M., Prince, R.L. & Finkelstein, J.S. 1998. Hypovitaminosis
D in medical inpatients. N. Engl. J. Med., 338: 777-783.
47. Looker, A.C. & Gunter, E.W. 1998. Hypovitaminosis D in medical inpatients. A letter to N.
Engl. J. Med., 339: 344-345.
48. Lachance, P.A. 1998. International Perspective: Basis, need and application of recommended
dietary allowances. Nutr. Revs., 56: S2-S5.
49. Jones, K.L. 1990. Williams syndrome: an historical perspective of its evolution, natural
history, and etiology. Am. J. Med. Genet. Suppl., 6:  89-96.
50. Fraser, D. 1967. The relation between infantile hypercalcemia and vitamin D – public health
implications in North America. Pediatr., 40: 1050-1061.
51. Mawer, E.B. & Davies, M. 1997.Vitamin D deficiency, rickets and osteomalacia, a returning
problem worldwide. In: Vitamin D. Chemistry, Biology and Clinical Applications of the
Steroid Hormone. p. 899-906. Norman AW, Bouillon R, Thomasset M eds. University of
California.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     121
Summary of the role of vitamin E in human metabolic processes
A
large body of scientific evidence indicates that reactive free radicals are involved in
many diseases, including heart disease and cancers (1). Cells contain many potentially
oxidizable substrates such as polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), proteins, and DNA.
Therefore, a complex antioxidant defence system normally protects cells from the injurious
effects of endogenously produced free radicals as well as from species of exogenous origin
such as cigarette smoke and pollutants. Should our exposure to free radicals exceed the
protective capacity of the antioxidant defence system, a phenomenon often referred to as
oxidative stress (2), then damage to biologic molecules may occur. There is considerable
evidence that disease causes an increase in oxidative stress; therefore, consumption of foods
rich in antioxidants, which are potentially able to quench or neutralise excess radicals, may
play an important role in modifying the development of such diseases.
Vitamin E is the major lipid-soluble antioxidant in the cell antioxidant defence system
and is exclusively obtained from the diet. The term “vitamin E” refers to a family of eight
naturally occurring homologues that are synthesised by plants from homogentisic acid. All are
derivatives of 6-chromanol and differ in the number and position of methyl groups on the ring
structure. The four tocopherol homologues (d-α-, d-β-, d-γ-, and d-δ-) have a saturated 16-
carbon phytyl side chain, whereas the tocotrienols (d-α-, d-β-, d-γ-, and d-δ-) have three
double bonds on the side chain. There is also a widely available synthetic form, dl-α-
tocopherol, prepared by coupling trimethylhydroquinone with isophytol. This consists of a
mixture of eight stereoisomers in approximately equal amounts; these isomers are
differentiated by rotations of the phytyl chain in various directions that do not occur naturally.
For dietary purposes, vitamin E activity is expressed as α-tocopherol equivalents (α-TEs).
One α-TE is the activity of 1 mg RRR-α-tocopherol (d-α-tocopherol). To estimate the α-TE
of mixed diet containing natural forms of vitamin E, the number of milligrams of β-
tocopherol should be multiplied by 0.5, γ-tocopherol by 0.1, and α-tocotrienol by 0.3. Any of
the synthetic all-rac-α-tocopherol (dl-α-tocopherol) should be multiplied by 0.74. One
milligram of the latter compound in the acetate form is equivalent to 1 IU of vitamin E.
Vitamin E is an example of a phenolic antioxidant. Such molecules readily donate the
hydrogen from the hydroxyl (-OH) group on the ring structure to free radicals, which then
become unreactive. On donating the hydrogen, the phenolic compound itself becomes a
relatively unreactive free radical because the unpaired electron on the oxygen atom is usually
delocalised into the aromatic ring structure thereby increasing its stability (3).
The major biologic role of vitamin E is to protect PUFAs and other components of cell
membranes and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) from oxidation by free radicals. Vitamin E is
located primarily within the phospholipid bilayer of cell membranes. It is particularly
effective in preventing lipid peroxidation, a series of chemical reactions involving the
oxidative deterioration of PUFAs. Elevated levels of lipid peroxidation products are
associated with numerous diseases and clinical conditions (4). Although vitamin E is
primarily located in cell and organelle membranes where it can exert its maximum protective
effect, its concentration may only be one molecule for every 2000 phospholipid molecules.
Chapter 9
Vitamin E
122
Chapter 9: Vitamin E
This suggests that after its reaction with free radicals it is rapidly regenerated, possibly by
other antioxidants (5).
Absorption of vitamin E from the intestine depends on adequate pancreatic function,
biliary secretion, and micelle formation. Conditions for absorption are like those for dietary lipid,
that is, efficient emulsification, solubilisation within mixed bile salt micelles, uptake by
enterocytes, and secretion into the circulation via the lymphatic system (6). Emulsification takes
place initially in the stomach and then in the small intestine in the presence of pancreatic and
biliary secretions. The resulting mixed micelle aggregates the vitamin E molecules, solubilises
the vitamin E, and then transports it to the brush border membrane of the enterocyte probably by
passive diffusion. Within the enterocyte, tocopherol is incorporated into chylomicrons and
secreted into the intracellular space and lymphatic system and subsequently into the blood
stream. Tocopherol esters, present in processed foods and vitamin supplements, must be
hydrolysed in the small intestine before absorption.
Vitamin E is transported in the blood by the plasma lipoproteins and erythrocytes.
Chylomicrons carry tocopherol from the enterocyte to the liver, where they are incorporated into
parenchymal cells as chylomicron remnants. The catabolism of chylomicrons takes place in the
systemic circulation through the action of cellular lipoprotein lipase. During this process
tocopherol can be transferred to high-density lipoproteins (HDLs). The tocopherol in HDLs can
transfer to other circulating lipoproteins, such as LDLs and very low-density lipoproteins
(VLDLs) (7). During the conversion of VLDL to LDL in the circulation, some α-tocopherol
remains within the core lipids and thus is incorporated in LDL. Most α-tocopherol then enters
the cells of peripheral tissues within the intact lipoprotein through the LDL receptor pathway,
although some may be taken up by membrane binding sites recognising apolipoprotein A-I and
A-II present on HDL (8).
Although the process of absorption of all the tocopherol homologues in our diet is
similar, the α form predominates in blood and tissue. This is due to the action of binding
proteins that preferentially select the α form over the others. In the first instance, a 30-kDa
binding protein unique to the liver cytoplasm preferentially incorporates α-tocopherol in the
nascent VLDL (9). This form also accumulates in non-hepatic tissues, particularly at sites
where free radical production is greatest, such as in the membranes of mitochondria and
endoplasmic reticulum in the heart and lungs (10).
Hepatic intracellular transport may be expedited by a 14.2-kDa binding protein that
binds α-tocopherol in preference to the other homologues (11). Other proteinaceous sites with
apparent tocopherol-binding abilities have been found on erythrocytes, adrenal membranes,
and smooth muscle cells (12). These may serve as vitamin E receptors which orient the
molecule within the membrane for optimum antioxidant function.
These selective mechanisms explain why vitamin E homologues have markedly differing
antioxidant abilities in biologic systems and illustrates the important distinction between the in
vitro antioxidant effectiveness of a substance in the stabilisation of, for example, a food product
and its in vivo potency as an antioxidant. From a nutritional perspective, the most important form
of vitamin E is α-tocopherol; this is corroborated in animal model tests of biopotency which
assess the ability of the various homologues to prevent foetal absorption and muscular
dystrophies (Table 22).
Plasma vitamin E concentrations vary little over a wide range of dietary intakes. Even
daily supplements of the order of 1600 IU/day for 3 weeks only increased plasma levels 2–3
times and on cessation of treatment plasma levels returned to pretreatment levels in 5 days
(13). Likewise, tissue concentrations only increased by a similar amount when patients
undergoing heart surgery were given 300 mg/day of the natural stereoisomer for 2 weeks
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     123
preoperatively (14). Kinetic studies with deuterated tocopherol (15) suggest that there is rapid
equilibration of new tocopherol in erythrocytes, liver, and spleen but that turnover in other
tissues such as heart, muscle, and adipose tissue is much slower. The brain is markedly
resistant to depletion and repletion with vitamin E (16). This presumably reflects an adaptive
mechanism to avoid detrimental oxidative reactions in this key organ.
The primary oxidation product of α-tocopherol is a tocopheryl quinone that can be
conjugated to yield the glucuronate after prior reduction to the hydroquinone. This is excreted in
the bile or further degraded in the kidneys to α-tocopheronic acid and hence excreted in the bile.
Those vitamin E homologues not preferentially selected by the hepatic binding proteins are
eliminated during the process of nascent VLDL secretion in the liver and probably excreted via
the bile (17). Some vitamin E may also be excreted via skin sebaceous glands (18).
Table 22
Approximate biological activity of naturally occurring tocopherols
and tocotrienols compared with d-α-tocopherol
Defining populations at risk of vitamin E deficiency 
There are many signs of vitamin E deficiency in animals most of which are related to damage to
cell membranes and leakage of cell contents to external fluids. Disorders provoked, for example,
by traces of peroxidized PUFAs in the diets of animals with low vitamin E status are cardiac or
skeletal myopathies, neuropathies, and liver necrosis (19) (Table 23). Muscle and neurological
problems are also a consequence of human vitamin E deficiency (20). Early diagnostic signs of
deficiency include leakage of muscle enzymes such as creatine kinase and pyruvate kinase into
plasma, increased levels of lipid peroxidation products in plasma, and increased erythrocyte
haemolysis.
The assessment of the vitamin E requirement for humans is confounded by the infrequent
occurrence of clinical signs of deficiency because these usually only develop in adults with fat-
malabsorption syndromes or liver disease, in individuals with genetic anomalies in transport or
binding proteins, and possibly in premature infants (19, 21). This suggests that diets contain
sufficient vitamin E to satisfy nutritional needs.
Several animal models (22) suggest that increasing intakes of vitamin E inhibit the
progression of vascular disease by preventing the oxidation of LDL. Evidence suggests that
oxidized lipoprotein is a key event in the development of the atheromatous plaque which may
ultimately occlude the blood vessel (23).
124
Chapter 9: Vitamin E
Table 23
Diseases and syndromes in animals associated with vitamin E deficiency
and excess intakes of polyunsaturated fatty acids
Syndrome
Affected organ or tissue
Species
Encephalomalacia
Cerebellum
Chick
Exudative diathesis
Vascular
Turkey
Microcytic anaemia
Blood, bone marrow
Chick
Macrocytic anaemia
Blood, bone marrow
Monkey
Pancreatic fibrosis
Pancreas
Chick, mouse
Liver necrosis
Liver
Pig, rat
Muscular degeneration
Skeletal muscle
Pig, rat, mouse
Microangiopathy
Heart muscle
Pig, lamb, calf
Kidney degeneration
Kidney tubules
Monkey, rat
Steatitis
Adipose tissue
Pig, chick
Testicular degeneration
Testes
Pig, calf, chick
Malignant hyperthermia
Skeletal muscle
Pig
Human studies, however, have been less consistent in providing evidence for a role of
vitamin E in preventing heart disease. Vitamin E supplements reduce ex vivo oxidizability of
plasma LDLs but there is no correlation between ex vivo lipoprotein oxidizability and
endogenous vitamin E levels in an unsupplemented population (24). Likewise, the few
randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled intervention trials with human volunteers which
focused on the relationship between vitamin E and cardiovascular disease have given
inconsistent results. There was a marked reduction in non-fatal myocardial infarction in patients
with coronary artery disease (as defined by angiogram) who were randomly assigned to take
pharmacologic doses of vitamin E (400 and 800 mg/day) or placebo in the Cambridge Heart
Antioxidant Study involving 2000 men and women (25). However, the incidence of major
coronary events in male smokers who received 20 mg/day of vitamin E for approximately 6
years was not reduced in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene study (26).
Epidemiologic studies suggest that dietary vitamin E influences the risk of cardiovascular
disease. Gey et al. (27) reported that lipid-standardized plasma vitamin E concentrations in
middle-aged men across 16 European countries predicted 62 percent of the variance in the
mortality from ischaemic heart disease. In the United States both the Nurses Health Study (28)
involving 87000 females in an 8-year follow-up and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study in
40000 men (29) concluded that persons taking supplements of 100 mg/day or more of vitamin E
for at least 2 years had approximately a 40 percent lower incidence of myocardial infarction and
cardiovascular mortality than did those who did not use supplements. However, in US studies
there was no influence of dietary vitamin E alone on incidence of cardiovascular disease when
those taking supplements were removed from the analyses. A possible explanation for the
significant relationship between dietary vitamin E and cardiovascular disease in European
countries but not in the United States may be found in the widely differing sources of vitamin E
in European countries. It is reported that sunflower seed oil, which is rich in α-tocopherol, tends
to be consumed more widely in the southern European countries with the lower cardiovascular
disease risk than in northern European countries where soybean oil, which contains more of the γ
form, is preferred (30) (Table 24). However, a study carried out which compared plasma α- and
γ-tocopherol concentrations in middle-aged men and women in Toulouse (southern France) with
Belfast (Northern Ireland) found that the concentrations of γ-tocopherol in Belfast were twice as
high as those in Toulouse; α-tocopherol concentrations were identical in men in both countries
but higher in women in Belfast than in Toulouse (P<0.001) (31).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     125
Table 24
Cross-country correlations between coronary heart disease mortality in men
and the supply of vitamin E homologues across 24 European countries
Homologue
Correlation coefficient, r
Total vitamin E
-0.386
d-α-tocopherol
-0.753
d-β-tocopherol
-0.345
d-γ-tocopherol
-0.001
d-δ-tocopherol
0.098
d-α-tocotrienol
-0.072
d-β-tocotrienol
-0.329
d-γ-tocotrienol
-0.210
The correlation with d-α-tocopherol is highly significant (P<0.001) whereas all other correlations do not achieve
statistical significance. 
     Source: Based on reference 30.
It has also been suggested vitamin E supplementation (200–400 mg/day) may be
appropriate therapeutically to moderate some aspects of degenerative diseases such as
Parkinson’s disease, reduce the severity of neurologic disorders such as tardive dyskinesia,
prevent periventricular haemorrhage in pre-term babies, reduce tissue injury arising from
ischaemia and reperfusion during surgery, delay cataract development, and improve mobility in
arthritis sufferers (32). However, very high doses may also induce adverse pro-oxidant effects
(33), and the long-term advantages of such treatments have not been proven.
Delineation of dietary sources and possible limitations to its
availability worldwide 
Because vitamin E is naturally present in plant-based diets and animal products and is often
added by manufacturers to vegetable oils and processed foods, intakes are probably adequate to
avoid overt deficiency in most situations. Exceptions may be during ecologic disasters and
cultural conflicts resulting in food deprivation and famine.
Analysis of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations country food
balance sheets indicates that about half the α-tocopherol in a typical northern European diet such
as in the United Kingdom is derived from vegetable oils (30). Animal fats, vegetables, and meats
each contribute about 10 percent to the total per capita supply and fruit, nuts, cereals, and dairy
products each contribute about 4 percent. Less than 2 percent is each obtained from eggs, fish
and pulses.
There are marked differences in per capita α-tocopherol supply among different
countries ranging from approximately 8-10 mg/head/day (e.g., Iceland, Finland, New Zealand,
and Japan) to 20–25 mg/head/day (e.g., France, Greece, and Spain) (30). This variation can be
ascribed mainly to the type and quantity of dietary oils used in different countries and the
proportion of the different homologues in the oils (Table 25). For example, sunflower seed oil
contains approximately 55 mg α-tocopherol/100 g in contrast to soybean oil that contains only 8
mg/100 ml (34). Consumption of these oils varies markedly among countries. Soybean, a rich
source of the less biologically active γ form, is most commonly used in northern European
countries whereas sunflower seed oils, which mainly contain the α form, are generally used in
southern Europe (30).
126
Chapter 9: Vitamin E
Table 25
Vitamin E content (mg tocopherol/100g) in vegetable oils
Oil 
α–tocopherol
γ–tocopherol
δ–tocopherol
α - tocotrienol
Coconut
0.5
0
0.6
0.5
Maize (Corn)
11.2
60.2
1.8
0
Palm
25.6
31.6
7.0
14.3
Olive
5.1
Trace
0
0
Peanut
13.0
21.4
2.1
0
Soybean
10.1
59.3
26.4
0
Wheatgerm
133.0
26.0
27.1
2.6
Sunflower
48.7
5.1
0.8
0
   Source: Slover HT, 1971. (34)
Summary of evidence for determining recommended nutrient intakes
In the chapter on antioxidants, it was decided that there was insufficient evidence to enable a
recommended nutrient intake (RNI) to be based on the additional health benefits obtainable from
nutrient intakes above those usually found in the diet. Even for vitamin E with its important
biologic antioxidant properties, there was no consistent evidence for protection against chronic
disease from dietary supplements. Nevertheless, the main function of vitamin E appears to be
that of preventing oxidation of PUFAs, and this has been used by those bodies proposing RNIs
for vitamin E because there is considerable evidence in different animal species that low vitamin
E and PUFAs excess gives rise to a wide variety of clinical signs.
There is very little clinical evidence of deficiency disease in humans except in certain
inherited conditions where the metabolism of vitamin E is disturbed. Even biochemical evidence
of poor vitamin E status in both adults and children is minimal. Meta-analysis of data collected
within European countries indicates that optimum intakes may be implied when plasma
concentrations of vitamin E exceed 25–30 µmol/L of lipid-standardized α-tocopherol (35).
However, this approach should be treated with caution, as plasma vitamin E concentrations do
not necessarily reflect intakes or tissue reserves because only 1 percent of the body tocopherol
may be in the blood (36) and the amount in the circulation is strongly influenced by circulating
lipid (37). Nevertheless, the lipid-standardized vitamin E concentration (e.g., tocopherol-
cholesterol ratio) greater that 2.25 (calculated as µmol/mmol) is believed to represent satisfactory
vitamin E status (36, 37). The erythrocytes of subjects with values below this concentration of
vitamin E may show evidence of an increasing tendency to haemolyze when exposed to
oxidizing agents and thus such values should be taken as an indication of biochemical deficiency
(38). However, the development of clinical evidence of vitamin E deficiency (e.g., muscle
damage or neurologic lesions) can take several years of exposure to extremely low vitamin E
levels (39).
The main factor used to assess the adequacy of vitamin E intakes by the US and UK
advisory bodies was the dietary intake of PUFAs. PUFAs are very susceptible to oxidation,
and their increased intake without a concomitant increase in vitamin E can lead to a reduction
in plasma vitamin E concentrations (40) and to elevations in some indexes of oxidative
damage in human volunteers (41). Generally, however, diets high in PUFAs are also high in
vitamin E, and to set a dietary recommendation based on extremes of PUFA intake would
deviate considerably from median intakes of vitamin E in most Western populations. Hence
‘safe’ allowances for the United Kingdom (men 10 and women 7 mg/day) (42) and ‘arbitrary’
allowances for the United States (men 10 and women 8 mg/day) (43) for vitamin E intakes
approximate the median intakes in those countries. It is worth noting that there were only 11
(0.7  percent) subjects out of 1629 adults in the 1986–1987 British Nutrition Survey who had
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     127
α-tocopherol – cholesterol ratios <2.25. Furthermore, although the high intake of soybean oil
with its high content of γ-tocopherol substitutes for the intake of α-tocopherol in the British
diet, a comparison of α-tocopherol-cholesterol ratios found almost identical results in two
groups of randomly selected, middle-aged adults in Belfast (Northern Ireland) and Toulouse
(France), two countries with very different intakes of α-tocopherol (34) and cardiovascular
risk (31).
It is suggested that when the main PUFA in the diet is linoleic acid, a d-α-
tocopherol-PUFA ratio of 0.4 (expressed as mg tocopherol per g PUFA) is adequate for adult
humans (44, 45), and the ratio has been recommended in the United Kingdom for infant
formulas (46). Use of this ratio to calculate the vitamin E requirements of men and women with
energy intakes of 2550 and 1940 kcal/day containing PUFA at 6 percent of the energy intake
(approximately 17 and 13 g, respectively) (42) produced values of 7 and 5 mg/day of α-TEs,
respectively. In both the United States and the United Kingdom, median intakes of α-TE are in
excess of these amounts and the α-tocopherol-PUFA ratio is approximately 0.6 (47), which is
well above the 0.4 ratio which would be considered adequate. The Nutrition Working Group of
the International Life Sciences Institute Europe (48) has suggested an intake of 12 mg α-
tocopherol for a daily intake of 14 g PUFAs to compensate for the high consumption of soya oil
in certain countries where over 50 percent of vitamin E intake is accounted for by the less
biologically active γ form. As indicated above, however, plasma concentrations in France and
Northern Ireland suggest that an increased amount of dietary vitamin E is not necessary to
maintain satisfactory plasma concentrations (31).
At present, data are not sufficient to formulate recommendations for vitamin E intake for
different age groups except for infancy. There is some indication that new-born infants,
particularly if born prematurely, are vulnerable to oxidative stress because of low body stores of
vitamin E, impaired absorption, and reduced transport capacity resulting from low concentrations
at birth of circulating low-density lipoproteins (49). However, term infants almost achieve adult
plasma vitamin E concentrations in the first week (50) and although the concentration of vitamin
E in early human milk can be variable, after 12 days it remains fairly constant at 0.32 mg TE/100
ml milk (51). Thus a human-milk-fed infant consuming 850 ml would have an intake of 2.7 mg.
It seems reasonable that formula milk should not contain less than 0.3 mg TE/100 ml of
reconstituted feed and not less than 0.4 mg TE/g  PUFA.
No specific recommendations concerning the vitamin E requirements in pregnancy and
lactation have been made by other advisory bodies (42, 43) mainly because there is no evidence
of vitamin E requirements different from those of other adults and presumably also as the
increased energy intake would compensate for the increased needs for infant growth and milk
synthesis.
Vitamin E appears to have very low toxicity, and amounts of 100–200 mg of the
synthetic all-rac-α-tocopherol are consumed widely as supplements (28, 29). Evidence of pro-
oxidant damage has been associated with the feeding of supplements but usually only at very
high doses (e.g., >1000 mg/day) (33).
Future research
More investigation is required of the role of vitamin E in biologic processes which do not
necessarily involve its antioxidant function. These processes include:
• structural roles in the maintenance of cell membrane integrity; 
• anti-inflammatory effects by direct and regulatory interaction with the prostaglandin
synthetase complex of enzymes, which participate in the metabolism of arachidonic acid; 
• DNA synthesis;
128
Chapter 9: Vitamin E
• stimulation of the immune response; and 
• regulation of intercellular signalling and cell proliferation through modulation of protein
kinase-C.
Similarly, more investigation is required of the growing evidence that inadequate vitamin
E status may increase susceptibility to infection particularly by allowing the genomes of certain
relatively benign viruses to convert to more virulent strains (52).
There is an important need to define optimum vitamin E intakes. Intervention trials with
morbidity and mortality endpoints may take years to complete. One approach to circumvent this
delay may be to assess the effects of different intakes of vitamin E on biomarkers of oxidative
damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA because their occurrence in vivo is implicated in many
diseases, including vascular disease and certain cancers.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     129
1. Diplock, A.T. 1994. Antioxidants and disease prevention. Mole. Aspects Med., 15:
293-376.
2. Sies, H. 1993. Oxidative Stress: an introduction. In: Oxidative stress; Oxidants and
antioxidants. Sies, H., ed. p. 15-22. London, Academic Press.
3. Scott, G. 1997. Antioxidants in science, technology, medicine and nutrition. Chichester,
Albion Publishing. 
4. Duthie, G.G. 1993. Lipid peroxidation. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 47: 759-764.
5. Kagan, V.E. 1998.Recycling and redox cycling of phenolic antioxidants. Ann. NY Acad.
Sci., 854: 425-434.
6. Gallo-Torres, H.E. 1970. Obligatory role of bile for the intestinal absorption of vitamin
E. Lipids, 5: 379-384.
7. Traber, M.G., Burton, G.W., Ingold, K.U. & Kayden, H.J. 1990. RRR- and
SRR-α-tocopherols are secreted without discrimination in Human chylomicrons, but
RRR-α-tocopherol is preferentially secreted in very low density lipoproteins. J. Lip. Res.,
31: 675-685.
8. Traber, M,G. 1996. Regulation of Human plasma vitamin E. In: Antioxidants in disease
mechanisms and therapeutic strategies. Sies, H., ed. p.49-63. San Diego, Academic Press. 
9. Traber, M.G. & Kayden, H.J. 1989. Preferential incorporation of α-tocopherol vs.
γ-tocopherol in Human lipoproteins. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 49: 517-526.
10. Kornbrust, D.J. & Mavis, R.D. 1979. Relative susceptibility of microsomes from lung,
heart, liver, kidney, brain and testes to lipid peroxidation: correlation with vitamin E
content. Lipids, 15: 315-322.
11. Dutta-Roy, A.K, Gordon, M.J., Leishman, D.J., Paterson, B.J., Duthie, G.G. &
James, W.P.T. 1993. Purification and partial characterisation of an α-tocopherol-binding
protein from rabbit heart cytosol. Mol. Cell., 123: 139-144.
12. Dutta-Roy, A.K, Gordon, M.J., Campbell, F.M., Duthie, G.G. & James, W.P.T. 1994.
Vitamin E requirements, transport, and metabolism: Role of α-tocopherol-binding
proteins. J. Nutr. Biochem., 5: 562-570.
13. Esterbauer, H., Gebicki, J., Puhl, H. & Jurgens, G. 1992. The role of lipid peroxidation
and antioxidants in oxidative modification of LDL. Free Radic. Biol. Med., 13: 341-390.
14. Mickle, D.A.G., Weisel, R.D., Burton, G.W. & Ingold, K.U. 1991. ffect of orally
administered α-tocopherol acetate on Human myocardial α-tocopherol levels. Cardiovas
Drugs Ther., 5: 309-312.
15. Traber, M.G., Ramakrishnan, R. & Kayden, H.J. 1994. Human plasma vitamin E
kinetics demonstrate rapid recycling of plasma RRR-a-tocopherol. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 91: 10005-10008.
16. Bourne, J. & Clement, M. 1991. Kinetics of rat peripheral nerve, forebrain and
cerebellum α-tocopherol depletion: Comparison with different organs. J. Nutr. 121:
1204-1207.
17. Drevon, C.A. 1991. Absorption, transport and metabolism of vitamin E. Free Radic. Res.
Commun., 14: 229-246.
18. Shiratori, 
T. 
1974. 
Uptake, 
storage 
and 
excretion 
of 
chylomicra-bound
3H-alpha-tocopherol by the skin of the rat. Life Sci., 14: 929-935.
REFERENCES
130
Chapter 9: Vitamin E
19. McLaren, D.S., Loveridge, N., Duthie, G.G. & Bolton-Smith, C. 1993. Fat Soluble
Vitamins In: Human nutrition and dietetics, Garrow, J.S., James, W.P.T.,eds. p. 208-238.
London, Churchill Livingstone Press.
20. Sokol, R.J. 1988. Vitamin E deficiency and neurologic disease. Ann. Rev. Nutr., 8:
351-373.
21. Traber, M.G., Sokol, R.J., Burton, G.W., Ingold, K.U., Papas, A.M., Huffaker, J.E.
& Kayden, H.J. 1990. Impaired ability of patients with familial isolated vitamin E
deficiency to incorporate α-tocopherol into lipoproteins secreted by the liver. J. Clin.
Invest., 85: 397-407.
22. Williams, R.J., Motteram, J.M. & Sharp, C.H. 1992. Dietary vitamin E and the
attenuation of early lesion development in modified Wattanabe rabbits. Atherosclerosis,
94: 153-159.
23. Steinberg, D., Parthasarthy, S., Carew, T.E., Khoo, J.C. & Witztum, J.L. 1989.
Beyond cholesterol. Modifications of low-density lipoprotein that increase its
atherogenicity. N. Engl. J. Med., 320: 915-924.
24. Dieber-Rotheneder, M., Puhl, H., Waeg, G., Striegl, G. & Esterbauer, H. 1991. Effect
of oral supplementation with D-α-tocopherol on the vitamin E content of Human low
density lipoprotein and resistance to oxidation. J. Lip. Res., 32: 1325-1332. 
25. Stephens, N.G., Parsons, A., Schofield, P.M., Kelly, F., Cheeseman, K. & Michinson,
M.J. 1996. Randomised control trial of vitamin E in patients with coronary disease:
Cambridge Heart Antioxidant Study (CHAOS). Lancet, 347: 781-786.
26. Rapola, J., Virtamo, J., Ripatti, S. Huttunen, J.K., Albanes, D., Taylor, P.R. &
Heinonen O.L. 1997. Randomised trial of alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene
supplements on incidence of major coronary events in men with previous myocardial
infarction. Lancet, 349: 1715-1720.
27. Gey, K.F., Puska, P., Jordan, P. & Moser, UK 1991. Inverse correlation between
plasma vitamin E and mortality from ischaemic heart disease in cross-cultural
epidemiology. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 326S-334S.
28. Stampler, M.J., Hennekens, M.D., Marson, J.E., Colditz, G.A., Rosner, B., & Willett,
W.C. 1993. Vitamin E consumption and risk of coronary heart disease in women. N. Engl.
J. Med., 328: 1444-1449.
29. Rimm, E.B., Stampler, M.J., Ascherio, A. Giovanucci, E., Colditz, G.A. & Willett,
W.C. 1993. Vitamin E consumption and risk of coronary heart disease in men. N. Engl. J.
Med., 328: 1450-1456.
30. Bellizzi, M.C., Franklin, M.F., Duthie, G.G. & James, W.P.T. 1994. Vitamin E and
coronary heart disease: the European paradox. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 48: 822-831.
31. Howard, A.N., Williams, N.R., Palmer, C.R., et al. 1996. Do hydroxy carotenoids
prevent coronary heart disease? A comparison between Belfast and Toulouse. Int. J. Vit.
Nutr. Res., 66:113-118.
32. Packer, L. 1993. Vitamin E: Biological activity and Health Benefits: Overview. In:
Vitamin E in health and disease. p. 977-982. New York, Packer, L, Fuchs, J., eds. Marcel
Dekker, Inc.
33. Brown, K.M., Morrice, P.C. & Duthie, G.G. 1997. Erythrocyte vitamin E and plasma
ascorbate concentrations in relation to erythrocyte peroxidation in smokers and
non-smokers: dose response of vitamin E supplementation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 65: 496-
502. 
34. Slover, H.T. 1971 Tocopherols in foods and fats, Lipids, 6: 291-296.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
     131
35. Gey, K.F. 1993. Vitamin E and other essential antioxidants regarding coronary heart
disease: risk assessment studies. In: Vitamin E in health and disease. p.589-634. New
York. Packer, L, Fuchs, J., eds.Marcel Dekker, Inc. 
36. Horwitt, M.K., Harvey, C.C., Dahm, C.H. & Searcy, M.T. 1972. Relationship between
tocopherol and serum lipid levels for the determination of nutritional adequacy. Ann. NY
Acad. Sci., 203: 223-236 
37. Thurnham, D.I., Davies, J.A., Crump, B.J., Situnayake, R.D. & Davis, M.1986. The
use of different lipids to express serum tocopherol:lipid ratios for the measurement of
vitamin E status. Ann. Clin. Biochem., 23: 514-520 
38. Leonard, P.J. & Losowsky, M.S. 1971. Effect of alpha-tocopherol administration on red
cell survival in vitamin E deficient Human subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 24: 388-393. 
39. Horwitt, M.K. 1980 . Interpretation of Human requirements for vitamin E. Vitamin E, a
comprehensive treatise, p. 621-636 [L. Machlin editor]. New York: Marcel Dekker.
40. Bunnell, R.H., de Ritter, E. & Rubin, S.H. 1975. Effect of feeding polyunsaturated fatty
acids with a low vitamin E diet on blood levels of tocopherol in men performing hard
physical labor. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 28: 706-711 
41. Jenkinson, A. McE., Franklin, M.F., Wahle, K. & Duthie, G.G. 1999. Dietary intakes
of polyunsaturated fatty acids and indices of oxidative stress in Human volunteers. Eur. J.
Clin. Nutr., 53: 523-528.
42. Department of Health. 1991. Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrients
for the United Kingdom. Report on Health and Social Subjects, No. 41. Anonymous
London: HMSO.
43. National Research Council. 1989. Recommended Dietary Allowances. Anonymous
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
44. Bieri, J.G. & Evarts, R.P. 1973. Tocopherols and fatty acids in American diets: the
recommended allowance for vitamin E. J.  Am. Diet. Assoc., 62: 147-151 
45. Witting, L.A. & Lee, L. 1975. Dietary levels of vitamin E and polyunsaturated fatty acids
and plasma vitamin E. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 28: 571-576 
46. Department of Health and Social Security.1980. Artificial feeds for the young infant.
Reports on health and social subjects; 18. Anonymous London: HMSO.
47. Gregory, J.R., Foster, K., Tyler, H. & Wiseman, M. 1990. The dietary and nutritional
survey of British adults. Anonymous London: HMSO.
48. Nutrition Working Group Of the International Life Science Institute Europe. 1990.
Recommended daily amounts of vitamins and minerals in Europe. Nutr. Abstracts Revs.,
(Series A). 60: 827-842.
49. Lloyd, J.K. 1990. The importance of vitamin E in nutrition. Acta Pediatr. Scand., 79:
6-11. 
50. Kelly, F.J., Rodgers, W., Handel, J., Smith, S. & Hall, M.A. 1990. Time course of
vitamin E repletion in the premature infant. Br. J. Nutr., 63, 631-638 
51. Jansson, L., Akesson, B. & Holmberg, L. 1981. Vitamin E and fatty acid composition of
Human milk. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 8-13 
52. Beck, M.A. 1998. The influence of antioxidant nutrients on viral infection. Nutr. Revs.,
56: S140-S146.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
133
V
itamin K is an essential fat-soluble micronutrient which is needed for a unique post-
translational chemical modification in a small group of proteins with calcium-binding
properties, collectively known as vitamin K – dependent proteins or Gla-proteins. Thus
far, the only unequivocal role of vitamin K in health is in the maintenance of normal
coagulation. The vitamin K – dependent coagulation proteins are synthesised in the liver and
comprise factors II, VII, IX, and X, which have a haemostatic role (i.e., they are
procoagulants that arrest and prevent bleeding), and proteins C and S, which have an
anticoagulant role (i.e., they inhibit the clotting process). Despite this duality of function, the
overriding effect of nutritional vitamin K deficiency is to tip the balance in coagulation
towards a bleeding tendency caused by the relative inactivity of the procoagulant proteins.
Vitamin K – dependent proteins synthesised by other tissues include the bone protein
osteocalcin and matrix Gla protein; their functions remain to be clarified.
Biological role of vitamin K 
Vitamin K is the family name for a series of fat-soluble compounds, which have a common
2-methyl-1, 4-naphthoquinone nucleus but differ in the structures of a side chain at the
3-position. They are synthesised by plants and bacteria. In plants the only important
molecular form is phylloquinone (vitamin K1), which has a phytyl side chain. Bacteria
synthesise a family of compounds called menaquinones (vitamin K2), which have side chains
based on repeating unsaturated 5-carbon (prenyl) units. These are designated menaquinone-n
(MK-n) according to the number (n) of prenyl units. Some bacteria also synthesise
menaquinones in which one or more of the double bonds is saturated. The compound
2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone (common name menadione) may be regarded as a provitamin
because vertebrates can convert it to MK-4 by adding a 4-prenyl side chain at the 3-position.
The biologic role of vitamin K is to act as a cofactor for a specific carboxylation
reaction that transforms selective glutamate (Glu) residues to γ-carboxyglutamate (Gla)
residues (1,2). The reaction is catalysed by a microsomal enzyme, γ-glutamyl, or vitamin K   –
dependent carboxylase, which in turn is linked to a cyclic salvage pathway known as the
vitamin K epoxide cycle (Figure 11).
Scheme shows the cyclic metabolism of vitamin K in relation to the conversion of
glutamate (Glu) to γ-carboxyglutamate (Gla) residues for the coagulation protein prothrombin.
A general term for the glutamate precursors of vitamin K-dependent proteins is proteins
induced by vitamin K absence, abbreviated PIVKA. For prothrombin (factor II) the glutamate
precursor is known as PIVKA-II. The active form of vitamin K needed for carboxylation is
the reduced form, vitamin K quinol. Known enzyme reactions are numbered 1, 2, and 3. The
carboxylation reaction is driven by a vitamin K-dependent carboxylase activity (reaction 1)
which simultaneously converts vitamin K quinol to vitamin K 2,3-epoxide. Vitamin K 2,3-
epoxide is reduced back to the quinone and then to the quinol by vitamin K epoxide reductase
(reaction 2). The reductase activity denoted 2 is dithiol dependent and is inhibited by
coumarin anticoagulants such as warfarin. Dietary vitamin K may enter the cycle via an
NAD(P)H-dependent vitamin K reductase activity (reaction 3), which is not inhibited by
warfarin.
Chapter 10
Vitamin K
134                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
Figure 11
The four vitamin K-dependent procoagulants (factor II or prothrombin, and factors
VII, IX, and X) are serine proteases that are synthesised in the liver and then secreted into the
circulation as inactive forms (zymogens). Their biologic activity depends on their normal
complement of Gla residues, which are efficient chelators of calcium ions. In the presence of
Gla and calcium ions these proteins bind to the surface membrane phospholipids of platelets
and endothelial cells where, together with other cofactors, they form membrane-bound
enzyme complexes. When coagulation is initiated, the zymogens of the four vitamin K-
dependent clotting factors are cleaved to yield the active protease clotting factors (1-3). Two
other vitamin K-dependent proteins called protein C and protein S play a regulatory role in the
inhibition of coagulation. The function of protein C is to degrade phospholipid-bound
activated factors V and VIII in the presence of calcium. Protein S acts as a synergistic
cofactor to protein C by enhancing the binding of activated protein C to negatively charged
phospholipids. Yet another vitamin K-dependent plasma protein (protein Z) is suspected to
have a haemostatic role but its function is currently unknown.
Apart from the coagulation proteins, several other vitamin K-dependent proteins have
been isolated from bone, cartilage, kidney, lungs, and other tissues (4, 5). Only two,
osteocalcin and matrix Gla protein (MGP), have been well characterised. Both are found in
bone but MGP also occurs in cartilage, blood vessel walls, and other soft tissues. There is
evidence that protein S is synthesised by several tissues including the vessel wall and bone
and may have other functions besides its well-established role as a coagulation inhibitor. It
also seems likely that one function of MGP is to inhibit mineralisation (6). Thus far, no clear
biologic role for osteocalcin has been established despite its being the major non-collagenous
bone protein synthesised by osteoblasts (7-9). This failure to establish a biologic function for
osteocalcin has hampered studies of the possible detrimental effects of vitamin K deficiency
on bone health. Evidence of a possible association of a suboptimal vitamin K status with
increased fracture risk remains to be confirmed (7-9).
The vitamin K epoxide cycle
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
135
Overview of metabolism
Absorption and transport
Dietary vitamin K, mainly as phylloquinone, is absorbed chemically unchanged from the
proximal intestine after solubilisation into mixed micelles composed of bile salts and the
products of pancreatic lipolysis (10). In healthy adults the efficiency of absorption of
phylloquinone in its free form is about 80 percent (10, 11). Within the intestinal mucosa the
vitamin is incorporated into chylomicrons, is secreted into the lymph, and enters the blood via
the lacteals (11, 12). Once in the circulation, phylloquinone is rapidly cleared (10) at a rate
consistent with its continuing association with chylomicrons and the chylomicron remnants
which are produced by lipoprotein lipase hydrolysis at the surface of capillary endothelial
cells (13). After an overnight fast, more than half of the circulating phylloquinone is still
associated with triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, with the remainder being equally distributed
between low-density and high-density lipoproteins (13). Phylloquinone is the major
circulating form of vitamin K but MK-7 is present in plasma at lower concentrations and has a
lipoprotein distribution similar to phylloquinone (13). Although phylloquinone in blood must
have been derived exclusively from the diet, it is not known whether circulating
menaquinones such as MK-7 are derived from the diet, intestinal flora, or a combination of
these sources.
Tissue stores and distribution
Until the 1970s, the liver was the only known site of synthesis of vitamin K-dependent
proteins and hence was presumed to be the only significant storage site for the vitamin.
However, the discovery of vitamin K-dependent processes and proteins in a number of
extra-hepatic tissues suggests that this may not be the case.
Human liver stores normally comprise about 90 percent menaquinones and 10 percent
phylloquinone (14, 15). There is evidence that the phylloquinone liver stores are very labile;
under conditions of severe dietary depletion, liver concentrations were reduced to about 25
percent of initial levels after only 3 days (15). This high turnover of hepatic reserves of
phylloquinone is in accord with the high losses of this vitamer through excretion (10).
Knowledge of hepatic stores of phylloquinone in different population groups is limited. Adult
hepatic stores in a UK study were about 11 pmol/g (14) whereas in a study from Japan they
were about twofold higher(15). Such reserves are about 20 000–40 000-fold lower than those
for retinol for relative daily intakes of phylloquinone that are only about 10-fold lower than
those of vitamin A (16).
The relationship between hepatic and total-body stores of vitamin K is not known.
Other sites of storage may be adipose tissue and bone; both are known to be sites where
vitamin K-bearing chylomicrons and chylomicron remnants may be taken up. It has been
reported that the predominant vitamer in human cortical and trabecular bone is phylloquinone;
unlike the situation in liver, no menaquinones higher than MK-8 were detected (17).
In contrast to the hepatic preponderance of long-chain menaquinones, the major
circulating form of vitamin K is invariably phylloquinone. The menaquinones MK-7 and
possibly MK-8 are also present but the common hepatic forms MKs 9–13 are not detectable
in blood plasma (16, 18). This might be a consequence of a different route of absorption (e.g.,
the possibility of a portal route for long-chain MKs versus the established lymphatic route for
phylloquinone) but might suggest that once in the liver, the lipophilic long-chain
menaquinones are not easily mobilised (16, 18, 19).
136                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
Bio-activity
Very little information exists on the relative effectiveness of different hepatic forms of K
vitamins for the coagulation function of vitamin K in humans. This information is important
because of the preponderance of long-chain menaquinones in human liver. Early bioassay
data from rats suggested that long-chain menaquinones (MKs-7, 9, and 10) were more
efficient than phylloquinone in reversing vitamin K deficiency when single doses were give
parenterally and that their sustained response may be due to their slower hepatic turnover (18,
19). A longer duration of the biologic response of MK-9 compared with phylloquinone in
vitamin K-deficient rats was also observed by Groenen-van Dooren et al. (20). On the other
hand Will and Suttie (21) showed that, when given orally, the dietary requirement of MK-9
for the maintenance of prothrombin synthesis in rats is higher than that for phylloquinone.
They also reported that the initial hepatic turnover of MK-9 was two- to three-fold slower
than that of phylloquinone.
Suttie (18) emphasised that the existence of a large pool of menaquinones in human
liver does not necessarily mean that menaquinones make a proportionately greater
contribution to the maintenance of vitamin K sufficiency. In humans the development of sub-
clinical signs of vitamin K deficiency detected in dietary phylloquinone restriction studies
argues against this, especially when placed alongside the lack of change of hepatic
menaquinone stores (15). One explanation is that much of the hepatic menaquinones is not
biologically available to the microsomal γ-glutamyl carboxylase because of a different sub-
cellular location, especially location in the mitochondria and possibly other non-microsomal
sites (18).
Excretion
Vitamin K is extensively metabolised in the liver and excreted in the urine and bile. In tracer
experiments it was found that about 20 percent of an injected dose of phylloquinone was
recovered in the urine whereas about 40–50 percent was excreted in the faeces via the bile
(10); the proportion excreted was the same regardless of whether the injected dose was 1 mg
or 45 µg. It seems likely, therefore, that about 60–70 percent of the amounts of phylloquinone
absorbed from each meal will ultimately be lost to the body by excretion. These results
suggest that the body stores of phylloquinone are being constantly replenished.
Two major human excretion products have been identified: carboxylic acids with 5
and 7-carbon sidechains that are excreted in the urine as glucuronide conjugates (10). The
biliary metabolites have not been clearly identified but are initially excreted as water-soluble
conjugates and become lipid soluble during their passage through the gut, probably through
deconjugation by the gut flora. There is no evidence for body stores of vitamin K being
conserved by an enterohepatic circulation. Vitamin K itself is too lipophilic to be excreted in
the bile and the sidechain-shortened carboxylic acid metabolites are not biologically active.
Populations at risk
Vitamin K deficiency bleeding in infants
In infants up to around age 6 months, vitamin K deficiency, although rare, represents a
significant public health problem throughout the world (19, 22, 23). The deficiency syndrome
is traditionally known as haemorrhagic disease of the newborn or more recently, to give a
better definition of the cause, vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB).
The time of onset of VKDB is more unpredictable than previously supposed and it is
now useful to recognise three syndromes: early, classic, and late (Table 26). Until the 1960s,
VKDB was considered to be solely a problem of the first week of life. Then, in 1966, came
the first reports from Thailand of a new vitamin K deficiency syndrome that typically
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
137
presented between 1 and 2 months of life and is now termed late VKDB. In 1977 Bhanchet
and colleagues (24), who had first described this syndrome, summarised their studies of 93
affected Thai infants, establishing the idiopathic history, preponderance of breast-fed infants
(98 percent), and high incidence of intracranial bleeding (63 percent). More reports from
South East Asia and Australia followed, and in 1983 McNinch et al. (25) reported the return
of VKDB in the United Kingdom. This increased incidence was ascribed to a decrease in the
practice of vitamin K prophylaxis and to an increased trend towards exclusive human milk
feeding (25). Human milk has lower concentrations of vitamin K than do infant milk formulas
(26).
Without vitamin K prophylaxis, the incidence of late VKDB (per 100,000 births),
based on acceptable surveillance data, has been estimated to be 4.4 in the United Kingdom,
7.2 in Germany, and as high as 72 in Thailand (27). Of real concern is that late VKDB, unlike
the classic form, has a high incidence of death or severe and permanent brain damage
resulting from intracranial haemorrhage (19, 22, 23).
Epidemiologic studies worldwide have identified two major risk factors for both
classic and late VKDB: exclusive human milk feeding and the failure to give any vitamin K
prophylaxis (19, 22, 23). The increased risk for infants fed human milk compared with
formula milk is probably related to the relatively low concentrations of vitamin K
(phylloquinone) in breast milk compared with formula milks (26, 28, 29). For classic VKDB,
studies using the detection of under-carboxylated prothrombin or proteins induced by vitamin
K absence (PIVKA)-II  as a marker of sub-clinical vitamin K deficiency have suggested that it
is the low cumulative intake of human milk in the first week of life rather than an abnormally
low milk concentration per se that seems to be of greater relevance (30, 31). Thus, classic
VKDB may be related, at least in part, to a failure to establish early breast-feeding.
Table 26
Classification of vitamin K deficiency bleeding of the newborn
Time of
presentation
Common 
bleeding sites
Comments
Early VKDB
0–24 hours
Cephalohaematoma,
intracranial,
intrathoracic, intra-
abdominal
Syndrome
Classic VKDB
1–7 days
Gastrointestinal, skin,
nasal, circumcision
Mainly idiopathic, maternal
drugs
Late VKDB
1–12 weeks
Intracranial, skin,
gastrointestinal
Mainly iodiopathic, may be
presenting feature of
underlying disease (e.g.,
cystic fibrosis,
α-1-antitrypsin deficiency,
biliary atresia); some
degree of cholestasis often
present
a VKDB, vitamin K deficiency bleeding.
 Source: Shearer (19).
For late VKDB other factors seem to be important because the deficiency syndrome
occurs when breast-feeding is well established and mothers of affected infants seem to have
normal concentrations of vitamin K in their milk (31). Instead some (although not all) infants
Maternal drugs a frequent
cause (e.g., Warfarin,
anti-convulsants)
138                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
who develop late haemorrhagic disease of the newborn are later found to have abnormalities
of liver function that may affect their bile acid production and result in a degree of
malabsorption of vitamin K. The degree of cholestasis may be mild and its course may be
transient and self-correcting, but affected infants will have increased dietary requirements for
vitamin K because of a reduced absorption efficiency.
Vitamin K prophylaxis in infants
Because bleeding can occur spontaneously and because no screening test is available, it is
now common paediatric practice to protect all infants by giving vitamin K supplements in the
immediate perinatal period. Vitamin K prophylaxis has had a chequered history but in recent
years has become a high-profile issue of public health in many countries throughout the
world. The reasons for this are twofold. First there is now a convincing body of evidence
showing that without vitamin K prophylaxis, infants have a small but real risk of dying from
or being permanently brain damaged by vitamin K deficiency in the first 6 months of life (19,
22, 23). The other, much less certain evidence stems from a reported epidemiologic
association between vitamin K given intramuscularly (but not orally) and the later
development of childhood cancer (32). The debate, both scientific and public, which followed
this and other publications has led to an increase in the use of multiple oral supplements
instead of the traditional single intramuscular injection (usually of 1 mg of phylloquinone)
given at birth. Although most of the subsequent epidemiologic studies have not confirmed any
cancer link with vitamin K, the issue is still not resolved (33, 34).
Vitamin K in adults
In adults, primary vitamin K–deficient states that manifest as bleeding are almost unknown
except when the absorption of the vitamin is impaired as a result of an underlying pathology
(1).
Dietary sources
High-performance liquid chromatography can be used to accurately determine the major
dietary form of vitamin K (phylloquinone) in foods, and food tables are being compiled for
Western diets (16, 35, 36). Phylloquinone is distributed ubiquitously throughout the diet, and
the range of concentrations in different food categories is very wide. In general, the relative
values in vegetables confirm the known association of phylloquinone with photosynthetic
tissues, with the highest values (normally in the range 400–700 µg/100 g) being found in
green leafy vegetables. The next best sources are certain vegetable oils (e.g., soybean,
rapeseed, and olive oils) which contain 50–200 µg/100 g. Some vegetable oils, such as
peanut, corn, sunflower and safflower oils, have a much lower phylloquinone content (1–10
µg/100 g). The great differences between vegetable oils obviously presents problems for
calculating the phylloquinone contents of oil-containing foods when the type of oil (or its
storage condition) is not known.
Menaquinones seem to have a more restricted distribution in the diet than does
phylloquinone. In the Western diet nutritionally significant amounts of long-chain
menaquinones have been found in animal livers and fermented foods such as cheeses. Yeasts
do not synthesise menaquinones and menaquinone-rich foods are those with a bacterial
fermentation stage. The Japanese food natto (fermented soybeans) has a menaquinone content
even higher than that of phylloquinone in green leafy vegetables.
The relative dietary importance of MK-4 is more difficult to evaluate because
concentrations in foods may well depend on geographic differences in the use of menadione
in animal husbandry, menadione from which MK-4 may be synthesised in animal tissues.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
139
Another imponderable factor is the evidence that animal tissues and dairy produce may
contain some MK-4 as a product of tissue synthesis from phylloquinone itself (37).
Knowledge of the vitamin K content of human milk has been the subject of
methodologic controversies with a 10-fold variation in reported values of phylloquinone
concentrations of mature human milk (38). Where milk sampling and analytical techniques
have met certain criteria for their validity, the phylloquinone content of mature milk have
generally ranged between 1 and 4 µg/l, with average concentrations near the lower end of this
range (28, 29, 38). However, there is considerable intra- and inter-subject variation, and levels
higher are in colostral milk than in mature milk (28). Menaquinone concentrations in human
milk have not been accurately determined but appear to be much lower than those of
phylloquinone. Phylloquinone concentrations in infant formula milk range from 3 to 16 µg/l
in unsupplemented formulas and up to 100 µg/l in fortified formulas (26). Nowadays most
formulas are fortified; typical phylloquinone concentrations are about 50 µg/l.
Bio-availability of vitamin K from foods 
Very little is known about the bio-availability of the K vitamins from different foods. It has
been estimated that the efficiency of absorption of phylloquinone from boiled spinach (eaten
with butter) is no greater than 10 percent (39) compared with an estimated 80 percent when
phylloquinone is given in its free form (10, 11). This poor absorption of phylloquinone from
green leafy vegetables may be explained by its location in chloroplasts and tight association
with the thylakoid membrane, where this naphthoquinone plays a role in photosynthesis. In
comparison, the bio-availability of MK-4 from butter artificially enriched with this vitamer
was more than twofold higher than that of phylloquinone from spinach (39). The poor
extraction of phylloquinone from leafy vegetables, which as a category represents the single
greatest food source of phylloquinone, may place a different perspective on the relative
importance of other foods with lower concentrations of phylloquinone (e.g., containing
soybean and rapeseed oils) but in which the vitamin is not tightly bound and its bio-
availability is likely to be greater. Even before bio-availability was taken into account, fats
and oils that are contained in mixed dishes were found to make an important contribution to
the phylloquinone content of the US diet (40) and in a UK study contributed 30 percent of the
total dietary intake (41).
No data exist on the efficiency of intestinal absorption of dietary long-chain
menaquinones. Because the lipophilic properties of menaquinones are greater than those of
phylloquinone, it is likely that the efficiency of their absorption, in the free form, is low, as
suggested by animal studies (18, 21).
Importance of intestinal bacterial synthesis as a source of vitamin K 
Intestinal microflora synthesise large amounts of menaquinones, which are potentially
available as a source of vitamin K (42). Quantitative measurements at different sites of the
human intestine have demonstrated that most of these menaquinones are present in the distal
colon (42). Major forms produced are MK-10 and MK-11 by Bacteroides, MK-8 by
Enterobacter, MK-7 by Veillonella, and MK-6 by Eubacterium lentum. It is noteworthy that
menaquinones with very long chains (MKs 10–13) are known to be synthesised by members
of the anaerobic genus Bacteroides and are major inhabitants of the intestinal tract but have
not been detected in significant amounts in foods. The widespread presence of MKs 10–13 in
human livers at high concentrations (14, 15) therefore suggests that these forms, at least,
originate from intestinal synthesis (16).
140                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
It is commonly held that animals and humans obtain a significant fraction of their
vitamin K requirement from direct absorption of menaquinones produced by microfloral
synthesis (43), but hard experimental evidence documenting the site and extent of any
absorption is singularly lacking (18, 19, 23). The most promising site of absorption is the
terminal ileum, where there are some menaquinone-producing bacteria as well as bile salts.
The evidence overall suggests that the bio-availability of bacterial menaquinones is poor
because they are mostly tightly bound to the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane and the largest
pool is present in the colon, which lacks bile salts for their solubilisation (19, 23).
Evidence on which recommendations can be based
Assessment of vitamin K status
Conventional coagulation assays are useful for detecting overt vitamin K-deficient states
which are associated with a risk of bleeding. However, they offer only a relatively insensitive
insight into vitamin K nutritional status and the detection of sub-clinical vitamin K-deficient
states. A more sensitive measure of vitamin K sufficiency can be obtained from tests that
detect under-carboxylated species of vitamin K-dependent proteins. In states of vitamin K
deficiency, under-carboxylated species of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation proteins are
released from the liver into the blood; their levels increase with the degree of severity of
vitamin K deficiency. These under-carboxylated forms (PIVKA) are unable to participate in
the normal coagulation cascade because they are unable to bind calcium. The measurement of
under-carboxylated prothrombin (PIVKA-II) is the most useful and sensitive homeostatic
marker of sub-clinical vitamin K deficiency. Importantly, PIVKA-II is detectable in plasma
before any changes occur in conventional coagulation tests. Several types of assay for
PIVKA-II have been developed which vary in their sensitivity (44).
In the same way that vitamin K deficiency causes PIVKA-II to be released into the
circulation from the liver, a deficit of vitamin K in bone will cause the osteoblasts to secrete
under-carboxylated species of osteocalcin (ucOC) into the bloodstream. It has been proposed
that the concentration of circulating ucOC reflects the sufficiency of vitamin K for the
carboxylation of this Gla protein in bone tissue (7, 45). Most assays for ucOC have been
indirect because they rely on the differential absorption of carboxylated and
under-carboxylated forms to hydroxyapatite and are difficult to interpret (46).
Other criteria of vitamin K sufficiency that have been used are plasma measurements
of phylloquinone and the measurement of urinary Gla. It is expected and found that the
excretion of urinary Gla is decreased in vitamin K deficiency.
Dietary intakes in infants and their adequacy
The average intake of phylloquinone in infants fed human milk during the first 6 months of
life has been reported to be less than 1 µg/day; this is approximately 100-fold lower than the
intake in infants fed a typical supplemented formula (29). This big disparity between intakes
is reflected in plasma levels (Table 27).
Using the detection of PIVKA-II as a marker of sub-clinical deficiency, a study from
Germany concluded that a minimum daily intake of about 100 ml of colostral milk (that
supplies about 0.2-0.3 µg of phylloquinone) is sufficient for normal haemostasis in a baby of
about 3 kg during the first week of life (30, 47). Similar conclusions were reached in a
Japanese study which showed a linear correlation between the prevalence of PIVKA-II and
the volume of breast milk ingested over 3 days (48); 95 percent of infants with detectable
PIVKA-II had average daily intakes of less than about 120 ml, but the marker was not
detectable when intakes reached 170 ml/day.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
141
Table 27
Dietary intakes and plasma levels of phylloquinone
 in human-milk-fed versus formula-fed infants aged 0–6 months
Phylloquinone intake (µg/day)
Human milk feda   Formula fedb
Plasma phylloquinone (µg/l)
Human milk fed      Formula fed
6
0.55
45.4
0.13
6.0
Age (weeks)
12
0.74
55.5
0.20
5.6
26
0.56
52.2
0.24
4.4
aBreast-milk concentrations averaged 0.86, 1.14, and 0.87 µg/l of phylloquinone at 6, 12, and 26 weeks,
respectively. 
bAll infants were fed a formula containing phylloquinone at 55 µg/l. 
 Source: Greer FR et al. (29).
Factors of relevance to classical vitamin K deficiency bleeding
The liver stores of vitamin K in the newborn infant differ both qualitatively and quantitatively
from that in adults. First, phylloquinone levels at birth are about one-fifth those in adults and
second, bacterial menaquinones are undetectable (14). The resistance to placental transport of
vitamin K to the human foetus is well-established (19, 22). Thereafter, the limited available
data suggest that hepatic stores of menaquinones build up gradually, becoming detectable at
around the second week of life but only reaching adult concentrations after 1 month of age
(14, 49). A gradual increase in liver stores of menaquinones may reflect the gradual
colonisation of the gut by enteric microflora.
A practical problem in assessing the functional status of vitamin K in the neonatal
period is that there are both gestational and postnatal increases in the four vitamin
K-dependent procoagulant factors which are unrelated to vitamin K status (50). This means
that unless the deficiency state is quite severe, it is very difficult to interpret clotting factor
activities as a measure of vitamin K sufficiency. The best diagnostic tool of the adequacy of
vitamin K stores for neonates is by the detection of PIVKA-II by immunoassays. The use of
this marker has clearly shown that there is a temporary dip in the vitamin K status of infants
exclusively fed human milk in the first few days after birth (30, 47, 48, 51, 52). The fact that
the degree of this dip is associated with human-milk intakes (30, 47, 48) and is less evident or
abolished in infants given artificial feeds (30, 48, 52) or prophylactic vitamin K at birth (48,
51, 52) shows that the detection of PIVKA-II reflected a dietary lack of vitamin K.
Factors of relevance to late vitamin K deficiency bleeding
The natural tendency for human-milk-fed infants to develop a sub-clinical vitamin K
deficiency in the first 2–3 days of life is self-limiting. Comparisons between untreated
human-milk-fed infants with others who had received vitamin K or supplementary feeds
clearly suggest that this improvement in vitamin K–dependent clotting activity is due to an
improved vitamin K status. After the first week, vitamin K–dependent clotting factor
increases are more gradual, and it is not possible from clotting factor assays to differentiate
between the natural post-natal increase in the synthesis of the core proteins from an improved
vitamin K status leading to greater functional activity.
Use of the most sensitive assays for PIVKA-II shows that there is still evidence of
suboptimal vitamin K status in infants solely fed human milk between the ages of 1 and 2
142                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
months (52, 53). Deficiency signs are less common in infants who have received adequate
vitamin K supplementation (52, 53) or who have been formula fed (52).
Dietary intakes in older infants, children, and adults and their adequacy
The only comprehensive national survey of phylloquinone intakes across all age groups
(except infants aged 0–6 months) is that of the US Food and Drug Administration Total Diet
Study, which was based on the 1987–88 Nationwide Food Consumption Survey (40). For
infants and children from the age of 6 months to 16 years, average phylloquinone intakes
were above the current US recommended dietary allowance (RDA) values for their respective
age groups, more so for children up to 10 years than from 10 to 16 years (Table 28) (40).
There have been no studies of intakes in children in relation to functional markers of vitamin
K sufficiency in children.
Intakes for adults in The Total Diet Study (Table 28) were also close to or slightly
higher than the current US RDA values of 80 µg for men and 65 µg for women, although
intakes were slightly lower than the RDA in the 25–30 years age group (54). There is some
evidence from an evaluation of all the US studies that older adults have higher dietary intakes
of phylloquinone than do younger adults (55).
The US results are very comparable with a detailed, seasonality study in the United
Kingdom in which mean intakes in men and women (aged 22–54 years) were 72 and 64
µg/day, respectively; no significant sex or seasonal variations were found (56). Another UK
study suggested that intakes were lower in manual workers and in smokers, reflecting their
lower intakes of green vegetables and high-quality vegetable oil (57).
Several dietary restriction and repletion studies have attempted to assess the adequacy
of vitamin K intakes in adults (55, 58). It is clear from these studies that volunteers
consuming less than 10 µg/day of phylloquinone do not show any changes in conventional
coagulation tests even after several weeks unless other measures to reduce the efficiency of
absorption are introduced. However, a diet containing only 2–5 µg/day of phylloquinone fed
for 2 weeks did result in an increase of PIVKA-II and a 70 percent decrease in plasma
phylloquinone (59). Similar evidence of a sub-clinical vitamin K deficiency together with an
increased urinary excretion of Gla was found when dietary intakes of phylloquinone were
reduced from about 80 to about 40 µg/day for 21 days (60). A repletion phase in this study
was consistent with a human dietary vitamin K requirement (for its coagulation role) of about
1 µg/kg body weight/day. 
The most detailed and controlled dietary restriction and repletion study in healthy
human subjects is that by Ferland et al. (61). In this study 32 healthy subjects in two age
groups (20–40 and 60–80 years) were fed a mixed diet containing about 80 µg/day of
phylloquinone, which is the RDA for adult males in the United States (54). After 4 days on
this baseline diet there was a 13-day depletion period during which the subjects were fed a
diet containing about 10 µg/day. After this depletion phase the subjects entered a 16-day
repletion period during which, over 4-day intervals, they were sequentially repleted with 5,
15, 25, and 45 µg phylloquinone. The depletion protocol had no effect on conventional
coagulation and specific factor assays but did induce a significant increase in PIVKA-II in
both age groups. The most dramatic change was in plasma levels of phylloquinone, which fell
to about 15 percent of the values on day 1. The drop in plasma phylloquinone also suggested
that the average dietary intake of these particular individuals before they entered the study had
been greater than the baseline diet of 80 µg/day. The repletion protocol failed to bring the
plasma phylloquinone levels of the young subjects back above the lower limit of the normal
range (previously established in healthy, free-living adults) whereas the plasma levels in the
elderly group only rose slightly above this lower limit in the last 4 days. Another indication of
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
143
a reduced vitamin K status in the young group was the fall in urinary output of Gla (90
percent of baseline) that was not seen in the elderly group; this suggested that younger
subjects are more susceptible to the effects of an acute deficiency than are older subjects.
Table 28
Mean dietary intakes of phylloquinone from US Food and Drug Administration
Total Diet Study based on 1987-88 Nationwide Food Consumption Survey
Group
No.a
Phylloquinone Intake (µg/day)
Infants
   6 months
141
77
10
Children
   2 years
   6 years
   10 years
   Females, 14–16 years
   Males, 14–16 years
15
20
30
45-55
45-65
Younger adults
   Females, 25–30 years
   Males, 25–30 years 
   Females, 40–45years
   Males, 40–45years
65
80
65
80
Older adults
   Females, 60–65 years
   Males, 60–65 years
   Females, 70+ years
   Males, 70+ years
65
80
65
80
aThe number of subjects as stratified by age and/or sex.
bTotal Diet Study (40).
cRecommended Dietary Allowance, 1989 (54).
One important dietary intervention study measured the carboxylation status of the
bone vitamin K-dependent protein, osteocalcin, in response to altered dietary intakes of
phylloquinone (62). This was a crossover study, which evaluated the effect in young adults of
increasing the dietary intake of phylloquinone to 420 µg/day for 5 days from a baseline intake
of 100 µg/day. Although total concentrations of osteocalcin were not affected by either of the
dietary treatments, ucOC fell dramatically in response to the 420 µg diet and by the end of the
5-day supplementation period was 41 percent lower than the baseline value. After the return
to the mixed diet, the ucOC percent rose significantly but after 5 days had not returned to
pre-supplementation values. This study suggested that the carboxylation of osteocalcin in
bone may require higher dietary intakes of vitamin K than those needed to sustain its
haemostatic function.
versus US RDA
1990 TDSb                     RDAc
152
154
119
188
174
24
46
45
52
64
492
386
319
293
59
66
71
86
313
238
402
263
76
80
82
80
144                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
Recommendations for vitamin K intakes
Table 29
Recommended nutrients intakes for vitamin K
µg /day
Infants and children   
    0–6 months
5*
    7–12 months
10
    1–3 years
    4–6 years
Age group
15
20
    7–9 years
25
Adolescents, 10–18 years
    Females
35-55
    Males
35-55
Adults
    Females, 19–65 years
    65+ years
55
55
    Males, 19–65 years
    65+ years
65
65
Pregnancy
55
Lactation
55
†The RNI for each age group is based on a daily intake of approximately 
1 microgram/body weight of phylloquinone.  
*This intake cannot be met by infants who are exclusively breast-fed.
To prevent bleeding due to vitamin K deficiency, the panel recommends that all breast
babies should receive vitamin K supplementation at birth according to nationally approved
guidelines. Vitamin K formulations and prophylactic regimes differ from country to country.
Guidelines range from a single intramuscular injection (usually 1 mg of phylloquinone) given
at birth to multiple oral doses given over the first few weeks (Table 29).
Infants 0–6 months
Consideration of the requirements of vitamin K for infants up to age 6 months is complicated
by the need to prevent a rare but potentially devastating bleeding disorder, which is caused by
vitamin K deficiency. To protect the few affected infants, most developed and some
developing countries have instituted a blanket prophylactic policy to protect infants at risk.
The numbers of infants at risk without such a programme has a geographic component, being
more prevalent in the Far East, and a dietary component with solely human-milk-fed babies
having the highest risk (22, 23, 27). Of the etiologic factors, some of which may still be
unrecognised, one factor in some infants is mild cholestasis. The problem of overcoming a
variable and, in some infants, inefficient absorption is the likely reason that oral prophylactic
regimens, even with two or three pharmacologic doses (1 mg phylloquinone), have
occasionally failed to prevent VKDB (63). This makes it difficult to design an effective oral
prophylaxis regimen that is comparable in efficacy with the previous “gold standard” of 1 mg
phylloquinone given by intramuscular injection at birth. In several countries intramuscular
prophylaxis fell out of favour after the epidemiologic report and subsequent controversy that
this route may be linked to childhood cancer (32-34).
Recommended Nutrient Intake
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
145
Infants who have been entirely fed with supplemented formulas are well protected
against VKDB and on intakes of around 50 µg/day have plasma levels that are about 10-fold
higher than the adult average of about 1.0 nmol/l (0.5 µg/l) (29) (Table 29). Clearly then, an
optimal intake would lie below an intake of 50 µg/day. Cornelissen et al. (64) evaluated the
effectiveness of giving infants a daily supplement of 25 µg phylloquinone after they had
received a single oral dose of 1 mg at birth. This regimen resulted in median plasma levels at
ages 4, 8, and 12 weeks of around 2.2 nmol/l (1.0 µg/l) when sampled 20–28 hours after the
most recent vitamin K dose; this level corresponds to the upper end of the adult fasting range.
In 12-week-old infants supplemented with this regime, the median plasma level was about
fourfold higher than that in a control group of unsupplemented infants (1.9 versus 0.5 nmol/l).
Also none of the 50 supplemented infants had detectable PIVKA-II at 12 weeks compared
with 15 of 131 infants (11.5  percent) in the control group. This regime has now been
implemented in The Netherlands and surveillance data on late VKDB suggest that it may be
as effective as parenteral vitamin K prophylaxis (63).
The fact that VKDB is epidemiologically associated with breast feeding means that it
is not prudent to base requirements solely on normal intakes of human milk and justifies the
setting of a higher value that can only be met by some form of supplementation. The current
US RDA for infants is 5 µg/day for the first 6 months (the greatest period of risk for VKDB)
and 10 µg/day during the second 6 months (54). This is based on the adult RDA of 1 µg/kg
body weight/day. However, if the vitamin K content of human milk is assumed to be about 2
µg/l, exclusively breast-fed infants aged 0–6 months may ingest only 20 percent of their
presumed daily requirement of 5 µg (54). Whether a figure of 5 µg/day is itself safe is
uncertain. In the United Kingdom the dietary reference value for infants was set at 10 µg/day,
which in relation to body weight (2 µg/kg) is about double the estimate for adults (65). It was
set with reference to the upper end of possible human milk concentrations plus a further
qualitative addition to allow for the absence of hepatic menaquinones in early life and the
presumed reliance on dietary vitamin K alone.
The association of VKDB with breast-feeding does not mean that most infants are at
risk of developing VKDB, because this is a rare vitamin K deficiency syndrome. In contrast to
measurements of PIVKA-II levels, comparisons of vitamin K–dependent clotting activities
have shown no detectable differences between infants fed human milk and those fed artifical
formula. The detection of PIVKA-II with normal functional levels of vitamin K–dependent
coagulation factors does not imply immediate or even future haemorrhagic risk for a
particular individual. The major value of PIVKA-II measurements in infants is to assess the
prevalence of suboptimal vitamin K status in population studies. However, because of the
potential consequences of VKDB, the paediatric profession of most countries agrees that
some form of vitamin K supplementation is necessary even though there are widespread
differences in actual practice.
Infants (7–12 months), children, and adults
In the past, the requirements for vitamin K only considered its classical function in
coagulation; an RDA was given for vitamin K in the United States (54, 58) and a safe and
adequate intake level was given in the United Kingdom (65). In both countries the adult RDA
or adequate intake was set at a value of 1 µg/kg body weight/day. Thus in the United States
the RDA for a 79-kg man is listed as 80 µg/day and for a 63-kg women as 65 µg/day (54).
At the time previous recommendations were set there were few data on dietary intakes
of vitamin K (mainly phylloquinone) in different populations. The development of more
accurate and wide-ranging food databases is now helping to address this question. The results
of several dietary intake studies in the United States and the United Kingdom suggest that the
146                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
average intakes for adults are very close to the respective recommendations of each country.
In the United States, preliminary intake data also suggest that average intakes of
phylloquinone in children and adolescents also exceed the RDA; in 6-month-old infants the
intakes exceeded the RDA of 10 µg by nearly eightfold (40), reflecting the use of
supplemented formula foods. Because there is no evidence of even sub-clinical deficiencies of
haemostatic function, a daily intake of 1 µg/kg may still be used as the basis for the
recommended nutrient intake (RNI). There is no basis as yet for making different
recommendations for pregnant and lactating women.
A relevant question is whether the RNI should be raised to take into account recent
evidence that the requirements for the optimal carboxylation of vitamin K–dependent proteins
in other tissues are greater than those for coagulation. There is certainly evidence that the γ-
carboxylation of osteocalcin can be improved by intakes somewhere between 100 and 420
µg/day (62). If an RNI for vitamin K sufficiency is to be defined as that amount necessary for
the optimal carboxylation of all vitamin K-dependent proteins, including osteocalcin, then it
seems clear that this RNI would lie somewhere above the current intakes of many, if not most,
of the population in the United States and the United Kingdom. Because a clearly defined
metabolic role and biochemical proof of the necessity for fully γ-carboxylated osteocalcin for
bone health is currently lacking, it would be unwise to make such a recommendation.
Toxicity 
When taken orally, natural K vitamins seem free of toxic side effects. This safety is illustrated
by the common clinical administration of phylloquinone at doses of 10–20 mg or greater.
Some patients with chronic fat malabsorption regularly ingest doses of this size without
evidence of any harm. However, synthetic preparations of menadione or its salts are best
avoided for nutritional purpose, especially for vitamin prophylaxis in the newborn. Besides
lacking intrinsic biologic activity, the high reactivity of its unsubstituted 3-position has been
associated with neonatal haemolysis and liver damage.
Future research 
The following are recommended areas for future research:
• prevalence, causes, and prevention of VKDB in infants in different population groups;
• bio-availability of dietary phylloquinone (and menaquinones) from foods and
menaquinones from gut flora; 
• significance of menaquinones to human requirements for vitamin K;
• the physiologic roles of vitamin K-dependent proteins in functions other than coagulation;
and 
• the significance of under-carboxylated vitamin K-dependent proteins and sub-optimal
vitamin K status to bone and cardiovascular health.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
147
1. Suttie, J.W. 1985. Vitamin K. 1985. In: Fat-soluble vitamins: their biochemistry and
applications. Diplock, A.D., ed. p. 225-311. London: Heinemann.
2. Furie, B. & Furie, B.C. 1990. Molecular basis of vitamin K-dependent γ-carboxylation.
Blood, 75: 1753-62. 
3. Davie, E.W. 1995. Biochemical and molecular aspects of the coagulation cascade.
Thromb. Haemost., 74: 1-6. 
4. Vermeer, C. 1990. γ-Carboxyglutamate-containing proteins and the vitamin K-dependent
carboxylase. Biochem. J., 266: 625-36. 
5. Ferland, G. 1998. The vitamin K-dependent proteins: an update. Nutr. Revs., 56: 223-30. 
6. Luo, G. 1997. Spontaneous calcification of arteries and cartilage in mice lacking matrix
GLA protein. Nature, 386: 78-81. 
7. Vermeer, C., Jie, K.S. & Knapen, MHJ. 1995. Role of vitamin K in bone metabolism.
Ann. Rev. Nutr., 15: 1-22. 
8. Binkley, N.C. & Suttie, J.W. 1995. Vitamin K nutrition and osteoporosis. J. Nutr., 125:
1812-21. 
9. Shearer, M.J. 1997. The roles of vitamins D and K in bone health and osteoporosis
prevention. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 56: 915-37. 
10. Shearer, M.J., McBurney, A. & Barkhan, P. 1974. Studies on the absorption and
metabolism of phylloquinone (vitamin K1) in man. Vit. Horm., 32: 513-42.
11. Shearer M.J., Barkhan P. & Webster G.R. 1970. Absorption and excretion of an oral
dose of tritiated vitamin K1 in man. Br. J. Haematol., 18: 297-308.
12. Blomstrand, R. & Forsgren, L. 1968. Vitamin K1-3H in man: its intestinal absorption
and transport in the thoracic duct lymph. Internationale Zeitschrift für Vitaminsforschung,
38: 45-64.
13. Kohlmeier, M. 1996. Transport of vitamin K to bone in Humans. J. Nutr., 126:
1192S-6S. 
14. Shearer, M.J. 1988. The assessment of Human vitamin K status from tissue
measurements. In: Current advances in vitamin K research. Suttie J.W., ed. p. 437-52.
New York: Elsevier. 
15. Usui, Y. 1990. Vitamin K concentrations in the plasma and liver of surgical patients. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 51: 846-52. 
16. Shearer, M.J., Bach, A. & Kohlmeier, M. 1996. Chemistry, nutritional sources, tissue
distribution and metabolism of vitamin K with special reference to bone health. J. Nutr.,
126: 1181S-6S. 
17. Hodges, S.J. 1993. Detection and measurement of vitamins K1 and K2 in Human cortical
and trabecular bone. J. Bone Min. Res., 8: 1005-8. 
18. Suttie, J.W. 1995. The importance of menaquinones in Human nutrition. Ann. Rev. Nutr.,
15: 399-417. 
19. Shearer, M.J. 1992. Vitamin K metabolism and nutriture. Blood Revs., 6: 92-104.
20. Groenen-van, Dooren, M.M.C.L. 1995. Bio-availability of phylloquinone and
menaquinones after oral and colorectal administration in vitamin K-deficient rats.
Biochem. Pharmacol., 50: 797-801.
REFERENCES
148                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
21. Will, B.H. & Suttie, J.W. 1992. Comparative metabolism of phylloquinone and
menaquinone-9 in rat liver. J. Nutr., 122: 953-8. 
22. Lane, P.A. & Hathaway, W.E. 1985. Vitamin K in infancy. J. Pediatr., 106: 351-9. 
23. Shearer, M.J. 1995. Fat-soluble vitamins: vitamin K. Lancet, 345: 229-34. 
24. Bhanchet, P. et al. 1977. A bleeding syndrome in infants due to acquired prothrombin
complex deficiency: a survey of 93 affected infants. Clin. Pediatr., 16: 992-8. 
25. McNinch, A.W., Orme, R.L’ E. & Tripp, J.H. 1983. Haemorrhagic disease of the
newborn returns. Lancet, i: 1089-90. 
26. Haroon, Y. 1982. The content of phylloquinone (vitamin K1) in Human milk, cows’ milk
and infant formula foods determined by high-performance liquid chromatography. J.
Nutr., 112: 1105-17. 
27. von Kries, R. & Hanawa, Y. 1993. (for the subcommittee). Neonatal vitamin K
prophylaxis (report of scientific and standardization subcommittee on perinatal
haemostasis). Thromb. Haemost., 69: 293-5. 
28. von Kries, R., Shearer, M., McCarthy, P.T., Haug, M., Harzer, G. & Göbel, U. 1987.
Vitamin K1 content of maternal milk: influence of the stage of lactation, lipid
composition, and vitamin K1 supplements given to the mother. Pediatr. Res., 22: 513-7.
29. Greer, F.R. Marshall, S. Cherry, J. & Suttie, J.W. 1991. Vitamin K status of lactating
mothers, Human milk and breast-feeding infants. Pediatr., 88: 751-6. 
30. von Kries, R., Becker, A. & Göbel, U. 1987. Vitamin K in the newborn: influence of
nutritional factors on acarboxy-prothrombin detectability and factor II and VII clotting
activity Eur J. Pediatr., 146: 123-7. 
31. von Kries, R., Shearer, M.J. & Göbel, U. 1988. Vitamin K in infancy. Eur J. Pediatr.,
147: 106-12.
32. Golding, J., Greenwood, R., Birmingham, K. & Mott, M. 1992. Childhood cancer,
intramuscular vitamin K, and pethidine given during labour. Br. Med. J., 305: 341-6.
33. Draper, G., & McNinch, A. 1994. Vitamin K for neonates: the controversy. Br. Med. J.,
308: 867-8.
34. Von Kries, R. 1998. Neonatal vitamin K prophylaxis: the Gordian knot still awaits
untying. Br. Med. J., 316: 161-2. 
35. Booth, S.L., Davidson, K.W. & Sadowski, J.A. 1994. Evaluation of an HPLC method
for the determination of phylloquinone (vitamin K1) in various food matrices. J. Agri.
Food Chem., 42: 295-300. 
36. Booth, S.L., Sadowski, J.A., Weihrauch, J.L. & Ferland, G. 1993. Vitamin K1
(phylloquinone) content of foods: a provisional table. J. Food Composition Anal., 6:
109-20. 
37. Thijssen, H.H.W. & Drittij-Reijnders, M.J. 1994. Vitamin K distribution in rat tissues:
dietary phylloquinone is a source of tissue menaquinone-4. Br. J. Nutr., 72: 415-25. 
38. Canfield, L.M. & Hopkinson, J.M. 1989. State of the art vitamin K in Human milk. J
Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr., 430-41. 
39. Gijsbers, B.L.M.G., Jie, K.-S.G. & Vermeer, C. 1996. Effect of food composition on
vitamin K absorption in Human volunteers. Br. J. Nutr., 76: 223-9.
40. Booth, S.L., Pennington, J.A.T. & Sadowski, J.A. 1996. Food sources and dietary
intakes of vitamin K-1 (phylloquinone) in the American diet: data from the FDA Total
Diet Study. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 96: 149-54.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
149
41. Fenton, S.T., Price, R.J., Bolton-Smith C., Harrington D. & Shearer M.J. 1997.
Nutrient sources of phylloquinone (vitamin K1) in Scottish men and women. Proc. Nutr.
Soc., 56: 301A. 
42. Conly, J.M. & Stein, K. 1992. Quantitative and qualitative measurements of K vitamins
in Human intestinal contents. Am. J. Gastroenterol., 87: 311-6. 
43. Passmore, R. & Eastwood, M.A. 1986. Davidson and Passmore Human Nutrition and
Dietetics, 8th edition, Edinburgh, Churchill Livingsone.
44. Widdershoven, J., van Munster, P., De Abreu, R., Bosman, H., van Lith,T., van der
Putten-van Meyel, M., Motohara, K. &  Matsuda, I. 1987. Four methods compared for
measuring des-carboxy-prothrombin (PIVKA-II). Clin. Chem., 33: 2074-8.
45. Vermeer, C. & Hamulyák, K. 1991. Pathophysiology of vitamin K-deficiency and oral
anticoagulants. Thromb. Haemost., 66: 153-9. 
46. Gundberg, C.M., Nieman, S. D., Abrams, S. & Rosen, H. 1998. Vitamin K status and
bone health: an analysis of methods for determination of undercarboxylated osteocalcin. J.
Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 83: 3258-66. 
47. von Kries, R., Shearer, M.J., Haug, M., Harzer, G. & Göbel, U. 1988. Vitamin K
deficiency and vitamin K intakes in infants. In: Current advances in vitamin K research.
Suttie J.W., ed. p.515-23. New York: Elsevier.
48. Motohara, K., Matsukane, I., Endo, F., Kiyota, Y. & Matsuda, I. 1989. Relationship
of milk intake and vitamin K supplementation to vitamin K status in newborns.
Pediatrics, 84: 90-3.
49. Kayata, S., Kinberg, C., Greer, F.R. & Suttie, J.W. 1989. Vitamin K1 and K2 in infant
Human liver. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr., 8: 304-7. 
50. McDonald, M.M. & Hathaway, W.E. 1983. Neonatal hemorrhage and thrombosis.
Semin. Perinatol., 7: 213-25. 
51. Motohara, K., Endo, F. & Matsuda, I. 1985. Effect of vitamin K administration on
acarboxy prothrombin (PIVKA-II) levels in newborns. Lancet, ii: 242-4. 
52. Widdershoven, J., Lambert, W., Motohara, K., Monnens, L., de LeenheeR, A.,
Matsuda, I. &  Endo, F. 1988. Plasma concentrations of vitamin K1 and PIVKA-II in
bottle-fed and breast-fed infants with and without vitamin K prophylaxis at birth. Eur. J.
Pediatr., 148: 139-42.
53. Motohara, K., Endo, F. & Matsuda, I. 1986. Vitamin K deficiency in breast-fed infants
at one month of age. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr., 5: 931-3. 
54. National Research Council. 1989. Recommended Dietary Allowances, 10th edition.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
55. Booth, S.L. & Suttie, J.W. 1998. Dietary intake and adequacy of vitamin K. J. Nutr.,
128: 785-8. 
56. Price, R., Fenton, S., Shearer, M.J. & Bolton-Smith, C. 1996. Daily and seasonal
variation in phylloquinone (vitamin K1) intake in Scotland. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 55: 244A. 
57. Fenton S., Bolton-Smith, C., Harrington, D., & Shearer, M.J. 1994. Dietary vitamin K
(phylloquinone) intake in Scottish men. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53: 98A.
58. Suttie, J.W. 1992. Vitamin K and Human nutrition. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 92: 585-90.
59. Allison, P.M., Mummah-Schendel, L.L., Kindberg, C.G., Harms, C.S., Bang N.U. &
Suttie, J.W. 1987. Effects of a vitamin K-deficient diet and antibiotics in normal Human
volunteers. J. Lab. Clin. Med., 110: 180-8.
150                  
Chapter 10: Vitamin K
60. Suttie, J.W., Mummah-Schendel, L.L., Shah, D.V., Lyle, B.J. & Greger, J.L. 1988.
Vitamin K deficiency from dietary restriction in Humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 47: 475-80. 
61. Ferland, G., Sadowski, J.A. & O’Brien, M.E. 1993. Dietary induced sub-clinical
vitamin K deficiency in normal Human subjects. J. Clin. Investig., 91: 1761-8. 
62. Sokoll, L. J., Booth, S.L., O’Brien, M.E., Davidson, K.W., Tsaioun, K. I. & Sadowski,
J.A. 1997. Changes in serum osteocalcin, plasma phylloquinone, and urinary γ-
carboxyglutamic acid in response to altered intakes of dietary phylloquinone in Human
subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 65: 779-84. 
63. Cornelissen, M., von Kries, R., Loughnan, P. & Schubiger, G. 1997. Prevention of
vitamin K deficiency bleeding: efficacy of different multiple oral dose schedules of
vitamin K. Eur. J. Pediatr., 156: 126-30. 
64. Cornelissen, E.A.M., Kollée, L.A.A., van Lith, T.G.P.J., Motohara, K. & Monnens,
L.A.H. 1993. Evaluation of a daily dose of 25 µg vitamin K1 to prevent vitamin K
deficiency in breast-fed infants. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr., 16: 301-5. 
65. Department of Health. 1991. Dietary reference values for food energy and nutrients for
the United Kingdom. Report on Health and and Social Subjects no. 41. London: H.M.
Stationery Office.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
151
I
t is nearly 30 years since the last FAO/WHO recommendations on calcium intake were
published in 1974 (1) and nearly 40 years since the experts’ meeting in Rome (2) on
which these recommendations were based. During this generation gap, a paradigm shift
has occurred with respect to the involvement of calcium in the aetiology of osteoporosis. The
previous reports were written against the background of the Albright paradigm (3), according
to which osteomalacia and rickets were due to calcium deficiency, vitamin D deficiency, or
both, whereas osteoporosis was attributed to failure of new bone formation secondary to
negative nitrogen balance, osteoblast insufficiency, or both. The rediscovery of earlier
information that calcium deficiency led to the development of osteoporosis (not rickets and
osteomalacia) in experimental animals (4) resulted in a reexamination of osteoporosis in
humans, notably in postmenopausal women. This reexamination yielded evidence in the late
1960s that menopausal bone loss was not due to a decrease in bone formation but rather to an
increase in bone resorption (5-8), and this has had a profound effect on our understanding of
other forms of osteoporosis. Although reduced bone formation may aggravate the bone loss
process in elderly people (9) and probably plays a major role in corticosteroid osteoporosis
(10) – and possibly in osteoporosis in men (11) – bone resorption is increasingly held
responsible for osteoporosis in women and for the bone deficit associated with hip fractures in
elderly people of both sexes (12). Because bone resorption is also the mechanism whereby
calcium deficiency destroys bone, it is hardly surprising that the role of calcium in the
pathogenesis of osteoporosis has received increasing attention and that recommended calcium
intakes have risen steadily in the past 35 years from the nadir which followed the publication
of the report from Rome in 1962 (13). The process has been accelerated by the growing
realisation that insensible losses of calcium (via skin, hair, nails, etc.) need to be taken into
account in the calculation of calcium requirement.
As the calcium allowances recommended for developed nations have been rising – and
may still not have reached their peak – the gap between them and the actual calcium intakes in
developing countries has widened. The concept that calcium requirement may itself vary from
culture to culture for dietary, genetic, lifestyle, and geographical reasons is emerging. This
report therefore seeks to make it clear that our main recommendations – like the latest
recommendations from USA and Canada (14), Great Britain (15), the European Union (16),
and Australia (17) – are largely based on data derived from the developed world and are not
necessarily applicable to nations with different dietary cultures, different lifestyles, and
different environments for which different calculations may be indicated.
Chemistry and distribution of calcium
Calcium is a divalent cation with an atomic weight of 40. In the elementary composition of
the human body, it ranks fifth after oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen, and it makes up
1.9 percent of the body by weight (18). Carcass analyses show that it constitutes 0.1–0.2
percent of early foetal fat-free weight, rising to about 2 percent of adult fat-free weight. In
absolute terms, this represents a rise from about 24 g (600 mmol) at birth to 1300 g (32.5 mol)
at maturity, requiring an average daily positive calcium balance of 180 mg (4.5 mmol) during
the 20 years of growth (Figure 12).
Chapter 11
Calcium
152
Chapter 11: Calcium
Figure 12
Whole-body bone mineral (WB Min) (left axis) and calcium (right axis) as a
function of age as determined by total-body dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
Note:  Data supplied by Dr Zanchetta, IDIM, Buenos Aires, Argentina).
Ninety-nine percent of the body calcium is located in the skeleton. The remaining 1
percent is equally distributed between the teeth and soft tissues, with only 0.1 percent in the
extracellular fluid (ECF). In the skeleton it constitutes 25 percent of the dry weight  and 40
percent of the ash weight. The ECF contains ionised calcium at about 4.8 mg/100 ml (1.20
mmol/l) maintained by the parathyroid – vitamin D system as well as complexed calcium at
about 1.6 mg/100 ml (0.4 mmol/l). In the plasma there is an additional protein-bound calcium
fraction of 3.2 mg/100 ml (0.8 mmol/l). In the cellular compartment the total calcium
concentration is comparable with that in the ECF, but the free calcium concentration is lower
by several orders of magnitude (19).
Biological role of calcium 
Calcium salts provide rigidity to the skeleton and calcium ions play a role in many if not most
metabolic processes. In the primitive exoskeleton and in shells, rigidity is generally provided
by calcium carbonate, but in the vertebrate skeleton it is provided by a form of calcium
phosphate which approximates hydroxyapatite [Ca10(OH)2(PO4)6] and is embedded in
collagen fibrils.
Bone mineral serves as the ultimate reservoir for the calcium circulating in the ECF.
Calcium enters the ECF from the gut by absorption and from bone by resorption. Calcium
leaves the ECF via the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and skin and enters into bone via bone
formation (Figure 13). In addition, calcium fluxes occur across all cell membranes. Many
neuromuscular and other cellular functions depend on the maintenance of the ionised calcium
concentration in the ECF. Calcium fluxes are also important mediators of hormonal effects on
target organs through several intracellular signalling pathways, such as the phosphoinositide
and cyclic adenosine monophosphate systems. The cytoplasmic calcium concentration is kept
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
153
down by a series of calcium pumps, which concentrate calcium within the intracellular
storage sites or extrude from the cells the calcium which flows in by diffusion. The
physiology of calcium metabolism is primarily directed towards the maintenance of the
concentration of ionised calcium in the ECF. This is protected and maintained by a feedback
loop through calcium receptors in the parathyroid glands (20), which control the secretion of
parathyroid hormone (see Figure 10 of Chapter 8). This hormone increases the renal tubular
reabsorption of calcium, promotes intestinal calcium absorption by stimulating the renal
production of 1,25-dihyroxycolecaliferol [1,25(OH)2D], and, if necessary, resorbs bone.
However, the integrity of the system depends critically on vitamin D status; if there is a
deficiency of vitamin D, the loss of its calcaemic action (21) leads to a decrease in the ionised
calcium and secondary hyperparathyroidism and hypophosphataemia. This is why
experimental vitamin D deficiency results in rickets and osteomalacia whereas calcium
deficiency gives rise to osteoporosis (4,22).
Figure 13
Major calcium movements in the body
Determinants of calcium balance
Calcium intake
In a strictly operational sense, calcium balance is determined by the relationship between
calcium intake and calcium absorption and excretion. A striking feature of the system is that
relatively small changes in calcium absorption and excretion can neutralise a high intake or
compensate for a low one. There is a wide variation in calcium intake among nations,
generally following the animal protein intake and depending largely on dairy product
consumption. The lowest calcium intakes are in developing countries, particularly in Asia,
and the highest are in developed countries, particularly in USA, Canada and Europe
(Table 30).
154
Chapter 11: Calcium
Table  30
Protein and calcium intakes in different regions of the world 1987–1989
Protein (g)
Calcium (mg)
Region
Total
Animal
Vegetable
Total
Animal
Vegetable
USA and Canada
108.7
72.2
36.5
1031
717
314
Europe
102.0
59.6
42.4
896
684
212
Oceania
98.3
66.5
31.8
836
603
233
Other developed
91.1
47.3
43.8
565
314
251
USSR
106.2
56.1
50.1
751
567
184
All developed
103.0
60.1
42.9
850
617
233
Africa
54.1
10.6
43.5
368
108
260
Latin America
66.8
28.6
38.2
476
305
171
Near East
78.7
18.0
60.7
484
223
261
Far East
58.2
11.0
47.2
305
109
196
Other developing
55.8
22.7
33.1
432
140
292
All developing
59.9
13.3
46.6
344
138
206
Source: Adapted from FAO Yearbook, 1990 (23).
Calcium absorption
Ingested calcium mixes with digestive juice calcium in the proximal small intestine from
where it is absorbed by a process, which has an active saturable component and a diffusion
component (24-27). At low calcium intakes calcium is mainly absorbed by active
(transcellular) transport, but at higher intakes an increasing proportion of calcium is absorbed
by simple (paracellular) diffusion. The unabsorbed component appears in the faeces together
with the unabsorbed component of digestive juice calcium known as endogenous faecal
calcium. Thus, the faeces contain unabsorbed dietary calcium and unreabsorbed digestive
juice calcium (Figure 14).
True absorbed calcium is the total calcium absorbed from the calcium pool in the
intestines and therefore contains both dietary and digestive juice components. Net absorbed
calcium is the difference between dietary calcium and faecal calcium and is numerically the
same as true absorbed calcium minus endogenous faecal calcium. At zero calcium intake, all
the faecal calcium is endogenous and represents the digestive juice calcium which has not
been reabsorbed; net absorbed calcium at this intake is therefore negative to the extent of
about 200 mg (5 mmol) (28,29). When the intake reaches about 200 mg (5 mmol), dietary and
faecal calcium become equal and net absorbed calcium is zero. As calcium intake increases,
net absorbed calcium also increases, steeply at first but then, as the active transport becomes
saturated, more slowly until the slope of absorbed on ingested calcium approaches linearity
with an ultimate gradient of about 5–10 percent (24,25,30,31). The relationship between
intestinal calcium absorption and calcium intake, derived from 210 balance studies performed
in 81 individuals collected from the literature (32-39), is shown in Figure 14.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
155
Figure 14
Relationship between calcium absorption and calcium intake
The relationships between calcium intake and calcium absorbed and excreted calcium
calculated from 210 balance experiments in 81 subjects (32-39). Equilibrium is reached at an
intake of 520 mg, which rises to 840 mg when skin losses of 60 mg are added and to 1100 mg
when menopausal loss is included. The curvilinear relationship between intestinal calcium
absorption and calcium intake can be made linear by using the logarithm of calcium intake to
yield the equation: Caa = 174 loge Cai -909 ± 71 (SD) mg/day, where Cai represents ingested
calcium and Caa net absorbed calcium. The relationship between urinary calcium excretion
and calcium intake is given by the equation: Cau = 0.078 Cai + 137 ± 11.2 (SD) mg/day,
where Cau is urinary calcium and Cai calcium intake.
True absorption is an inverse function of calcium intake, falling from some 70 percent
at very low intakes to about 35 percent at high intakes (Figure 15). Percent net absorption is
negative at low intakes, becomes positive as intake increases, reaches a peak of about 30
percent at an intake of about 400 mg, and then falls off as the intake increases. The two lines
converge as intake rises because the endogenous faecal component (which separates them)
becomes proportionately smaller.
Many factors influence the availability of calcium for absorption and the absorptive
mechanism itself. The former includes substances, which form insoluble complexes with
calcium, such as the phosphate ion. The relatively high calcium-phosphate ratio of 2.2 in
human milk compared with 0.77 in cow milk (18) may be a factor in the higher absorption of
calcium from human milk than cow milk (see below).
Intestinal calcium absorption is mainly controlled by the serum concentration of
1,25(OH)2D (see Chapter 8). The activity of the 1-α-hydroxylase, which catalyses
1,25(OH)2D production from 25-hydroxycolecalciferol (25OHD) in the kidneys, is negatively
related to the plasma calcium and phosphate concentrations and positively to plasma
parathyroid hormone (21). Thus the inverse relationship between calcium intake and
156
Chapter 11: Calcium
fractional absorption described above is enhanced by the inverse relationship between dietary
calcium and serum 1,25(OH)2D (21,40,41).
Phytates, present in the husks of many cereals as well as in nuts, seeds, and legumes,
can form insoluble calcium phytate salts in the gastrointestinal tract. Excess oxalates can
precipitate calcium in the bowel but are not an important factor in most diets.
Figure 15
True and net calcium absorption as percents of calcium intake
Note: The great differences between these functions at low calcium intakes and their progressive
convergence as calcium intake increases.
Urinary calcium
Urinary calcium is the fraction of the filtered plasma water calcium, which is not
reabsorbed in the renal tubules. At a normal glomerular filtration rate of 120 ml/min and
ultrafiltrable calcium of 6.4 mg/100 ml (1.60 mmol/l), the filtered load of calcium is about 8
mg/min (0.20 mmol/min) or 11.6 g/day (290 mmol/day). Because the usual 24-hour calcium
excretion in developed countries is about 160–200 mg (4–5 mmol), it follows that 98–99
percent of the filtered calcium is usually reabsorbed in the renal tubules. However, calcium
excretion is extremely sensitive to changes in filtered load. A decrease in plasma water
calcium of only 0.17 mg/100 ml (0.043 mmol/l), which is barely detectable, was sufficient to
account for a decrease in urinary calcium of 63 mg (1.51 mmol) when 27 subjects changed
from a normal- to a low-calcium diet (42). This very sensitive renal response to calcium
deprivation combines with the inverse relationship between calcium intake and absorption to
stabilise the plasma ionised calcium concentration and to preserve the equilibrium between
calcium entering and leaving the ECF over a wide range of calcium intakes. However, there is
always a significant obligatory loss of calcium in the urine (as there is in the faeces), even on
a low calcium intake, simply because maintenance of the plasma ionised calcium and,
therefore, of the filtered load, prevents total elimination of the calcium from the urine. The
lower limit for urinary calcium in developed countries is about 140 mg (3.5 mmol) but
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
157
depends on protein and salt intakes. From this obligatory minimum, urinary calcium increases
on intake with a slope of about 5–10 percent (30,31,43). In the graph derived from 210
balance studies referred to above (Figure 14), the relationship between urinary calcium
excretion and calcium intake is represented by the line which intersects the absorbed calcium
line at an intake of 520 mg.
Insensible losses
Urinary and endogenous faecal calcium are not the only forms of excreted calcium; losses
through skin, hair, and nails need to be taken into account. These are not easily measured, but
a combined balance and isotope procedure has yielded estimates of daily insensible calcium
losses in the range of 40–80 mg (1–2 mmol), which are unrelated to calcium intake (44,45).
The addition of a loss of 60 mg (1.5 mmol) as a constant to urinary calcium loss raises the
dietary calcium at which absorbed and excreted calcium reach equilibrium from 520 to 840
mg (13 to 21 mmol) (Figure 14).
Calcium requirements and recommended intakes
Methodology
Although it is well established that calcium deficiency causes osteoporosis in experimental
animals, the contribution that calcium deficiency makes to osteoporosis in humans is much
more controversial, not least because of the great variation in calcium intakes across the world
(Table 30), which does not appear to be associated with any corresponding variation in the
prevalence of osteoporosis. This issue is dealt with at greater length below in the section on
nutritional factors; in this section we will simply define what is meant by calcium requirement
and how it may be calculated.
The calcium requirement of an adult is generally recognised to be the intake required
to maintain calcium balance and therefore skeletal integrity. The mean calcium requirement of
adults is therefore the mean intake at which intake and output are equal, which at present can
only be determined by balance studies conducted with sufficient care and over a sufficiently
long period to ensure reasonable accuracy and then corrected for insensible losses. The
reputation of the balance technique has been harmed by a few studies with inadequate
equilibration times and short collection periods, but this should not be allowed to detract from
the value of the meticulous work of those who have collected faecal and urinary samples for
weeks or months from subjects on well-defined diets. This meticulous work has produced
valuable balance data, which are clearly valid; the mean duration of the balances in the 210
studies from eight publications used in this report was 90 days with a range of 6–480 days.
(The four 6-day balances in the series used a non-absorbable marker and are therefore
acceptable.)
The usual way of determining mean calcium requirement from balance studies has
been by linear regression of calcium output (or calcium balance) on intake and calculation of
the mean intake at which intake and output are equal (or balance is zero). This was probably
first done in 1939 by Mitchell and Curzon (46), who arrived at a mean requirement of 9.8
mg/kg/day or about 640 mg (16 mmol) at a mean body weight of 65 kg. The same type of
calculation was subsequently used by many other workers who arrived at requirements
ranging from 200 mg/day (5 mmol/day) in male Peruvian prisoners (47) to 990 mg (24.75
mmol) in premenopausal women (48), but most values were about 600 mg (15 mmol) (31)
without allowing for insensible losses. However, this type of simple linear regression yields a
higher mean calcium requirement (640 mg in the same 210 balances) (Figure 16a) than the
intercept of absorbed and excreted calcium (520 mg) (Figure 14) because it tends to
underestimate the negative calcium balance at low intake and overestimate the positive
balance at high intake. A better reflection of biological reality is obtained by deriving calcium
158
Chapter 11: Calcium
output from the functions given in the previous section and then regressing that output on
calcium intake. This yields the result shown in Figure 16b where the negative balance is more
severe at low intakes and less positive at high intakes than in the linear model and in which
zero balance occurs at 520 mg as in Figure 14.
Figure 16a
Calcium output as a linear (A) function of calcium intake
calculated from the same balances as Figure 14
Note: The regression line crosses the line of equality at an intake of 640 mg. 
The equation is: Cao = 0.779 Cai + 142 mg where Cao is calcium output.
An alternative way of calculating calcium requirement is to determine the intake at
which the mean maximum positive balance occurs. This has been done with a two-
component, split, linear regression model in which calcium balance is regressed on intake to
determine the threshold intake above which no further increase in calcium retention occurs
(49). This may well be an appropriate way of calculating the calcium requirement of children
and adolescents (and perhaps pregnant and lactating women) who need to be in positive
calcium balance and in whom the difference between calcium intake and output is therefore
relatively large and measurable by the balance technique. However, in normal adults the
difference between calcium intake and output at high calcium intakes represents a very small
difference between two large numbers, and this calculation therefore carries too great an error
to calculate their requirement.
We are inclined to think that the most satisfactory way of calculating calcium
requirement from current data is as the intake at which excreted calcium equals net absorbed
calcium, which has the advantage of permitting separate analysis of the effects of changes in
calcium absorption and excretion. This intercept has been shown in Figure 14 to occur at an
intake of about 520 mg, but when insensible losses of calcium of 60 mg (1.5 mmol) (44,45)
are taken into account, the intercept rises to 840 mg, which we believe is as close as it is
possible to get at present to the calcium requirement of adults on Western-style diets. The
addition to this excretion line of an additional obligatory urinary calcium of 30 mg (0.75
mmol) at menopause (50) raises the amount to about 1100 mg, which we suggest is the mean
calcium requirement of postmenopausal women (see below). However, this type of
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
159
calculation cannot easily be applied to other high-risk populations (such as children) because
there are not sufficient published data from these groups to permit a similar analysis of the
relationship among calcium intake, absorption, and excretion. An alternative is to estimate
how much calcium each population group needs to absorb to meet obligatory calcium losses
and desirable calcium retention and then to calculate the intake required to provide this rate of
calcium absorption. This is what has been done in the following section.
Figure 16b
Calcium output as a non-linear function of calcium intake
calculated from the same balances as Figure 14
Note: The regression line crosses the line of equality at an intake of 520 mg. 
The equation is: Cao = Cai -174 Loge CaI - 909 + 0.078 Cau + 137 mg.
Populations at risk 
It is clear from Figure 12 that a positive calcium balance (i.e., net calcium retention) is
required throughout growth, particularly during the first 2 years of life and during puberty and
adolescence. These age groups therefore constitute populations at risk for calcium deficiency,
as are pregnant women (especially in the last trimester), lactating women, postmenopausal
women, and, possibly, elderly men. Our calculations for these groups, ultimately derived from
Western European and North American data, are given below.
Recommendations by group
Infancy
In the first 2 years of life, the daily calcium increment in the skeleton is about 100 mg (2.5
mmol) (51). The urinary calcium of infants is about 10 mg/day (0.25 mmol/day) and is
virtually independent of intake (52-56) and insensible losses are perhaps the same. Therefore,
infants need to absorb some 120 mg (3 mmol) of calcium daily to allow for normal growth.
What this represents in dietary terms can be calculated from calcium absorption studies in
newborn infants (52-56), which suggest that the absorption of calcium from cow milk by
160
Chapter 11: Calcium
infants is about 0.5 SD above the normal adult slope and from human milk is more than 1 SD
above the normal adult slope. If this information is correct, different recommendations need to
be made for infants depending on milk source. With human milk, an absorption of 120 mg (3
mmol) of calcium requires a mean intake of 240 mg (6 mmol) (Figure 17) and a
recommended intake of say 300 mg (7.5 mmol), which is close to the amount provided in the
average daily milk production of 750 ml. With cow milk, calcium intake needs to be about
300 mg (7.5 mmol) to meet the requirement (Figure 17) and the allowance should be 400 mg
(10 mmol) (Table 31).
Figure 17
Calcium intakes required to provide the absorbed calcium necessary
to meet calcium requirements at different stages in the lifecycle
Note: The solid lines represent the mean and range of calcium absorption as a function of calcium
intake derived from the equation in Figure 14. The interrupted lines represent the estimated calcium
requirements based on Western European and North American data.
Childhood
The accumulation of whole-body calcium with skeletal growth is illustrated in Figure 12. It
rises from about 120 g (3 mol) at age 2 years to 400 g (10 mol) at age 9 years. These values
can be converted into a daily rate of calcium accumulation from ages 2 to 9 of about 120 mg
(3 mmol), which is very similar to the amount calculated by Leitch and Aitken (57) from
growth analyses. Although urinary calcium must rise with the growth-related rise in
glomerular filtration rate, a reasonable estimate of the mean value from ages 2 to 9 might be
60 mg (1.5 mmol) (58). When this is added to a daily skeletal increment of 120 mg (3 mmol)
and a dermal loss of perhaps 40 mg (1.0 mmol), the average daily net absorbed calcium needs
to be 220 mg (5.5 mmol) during this period. If the net absorption of calcium by children is 1
SD above that of adults, the average daily requirement during this period is about 440 mg (11
mmol) (Figure 17) and the average recommended intake is 600 mg (15 mmol) – somewhat
lower in the earlier years and somewhat higher in the later years (Table 31).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
161
Table 31
Recommended calcium allowances based on Western European,
Group
mg/day
Infants and children
   0–6 months
Human milk
Cow milk
300
400
   7–12 months
400
   1–3 years
500
   4–6 years
600
   7–9 years 
700
Adolescents, 10–18 years
1300a
Adults 
   Females
19 years to menopause
Postmenopause
1000
1300
   Males
19–65 years
65 +
1000
1300
Pregnancy (last trimester)
1200
Lactation
1000
a Particularly during the growth spurt.
Puberty and adolescence
As can be seen in Figure 12, a striking increase in the rate of skeletal calcium accretion
occurs at puberty – from about  ages 10 to 17 years. The peak rate of calcium retention in this
period is 300–400 mg (7.5–10 mmol) daily (57); it occurs earlier in girls but continues longer
in boys. For a target value of 300 mg (7.5 mmol) for the skeleton, 100 mg (2.5 mmol) for
urinary calcium (58), and insensible losses of 40 mg (1.0 mmol), the net absorbed calcium
during at least part of this period needs to be 440 mg (11 mmol) daily. Even with assuming
high calcium absorption (+2 SD), this requires an intake of 1040 mg (26.0 mmol) daily
(Figure 17) and an allowance of 1300 mg (32.5 mmol) during the peak growth phase
(Table 31). It is difficult to justify any difference between the allowances for boys and girls
because, as mentioned above, although the growth spurt starts earlier in girls, it continues
longer in boys. This recommended intake (which is close to that derived differently by
Matkovic and Heaney [49,58]) is not achieved by many adolescents even in developed
countries (59-61), but the effects of this shortfall on their growth and bone status are
unknown.
Adults
As indicated earlier and for the reasons given, we accept that the mean apparent calcium
requirement of adults in developed countries is about 520 mg (13 mmol) but that this is
increased by insensible losses to some 840 mg (21 mmol) (Figure 14). This reasoning forms
the basis of our recommended intake for adults of 1000 mg (Table 31).
American and Canadian data
Recommended intake
162
Chapter 11: Calcium
Menopause
The most important single cause of osteoporosis – at least in developed countries – is
probably menopause, which is accompanied by an unequivocal and sustained rise in
obligatory urinary calcium of about 30 mg (0.75 mmol) daily (50,62,63). Because calcium
absorption certainly does not increase at this time – and probably decreases (64,65) – this
extra urinary calcium represents a negative calcium balance which is compatible with the
average bone loss of about 0.5–1.0 percent per year after menopause. There is a consensus
that these events are associated with an increase in bone resorption but controversy continues
about whether this is the primary event, the response to an increased calcium demand, or both.
The results of calcium trials are clearly relevant. Before 1997, there had been 20 prospective
trials of calcium supplementation in 857 postmenopausal women and 625 control subjects;
these trials showed highly significant suppression of bone loss by calcium (65). Another
meta-analysis covering similar numbers showed that calcium supplementation significantly
enhanced the effect of oestrogen on bone (66). It is therefore logical to recommend sufficient
additional calcium after the menopause to cover at least the extra obligatory loss of calcium in
the urine. The additional dietary calcium needed to meet an increased urinary loss of 30 mg
(0.75 mmol) is 260 mg/day (6.5 mmol/day) (Figure 14), which raises the daily requirement
from 840 mg (21 mmol) to 1100 mg (27.5 mmol) and the recommended intake from 1000 to
1300 mg/day (25 to 32.5 mmol/day), which is a little higher than that recommended by the
United States and Canada (14) (Table 31 and 32).
Table 32
Current calcium intake recommendations (mg/day)
Pregnancy
(last trimester)
1100
700
700
1000–1300
Lactation
1200
1250
1200
1000–1300
Infancy
300 (human milk)
500 (cow milk)
525
400
210–270
Childhood
530-800
350–550
400-550
500–800
Puberty and
adolescence
Boys
1000–1200
1000
1000
1300
Girls
800–1000
800
800
1300
Maturity
Males
800
700
700
1000
Females
800
700
700
1000
Later life
Males >65 years
800
700
700
1200
Postmenopausal
women
United
Kingdom
European
Union
1991
Reference
1993
Population
Australia
1991
Recommended
Dietary Intake
Nutrient
Reference
Intake
Intake
1000
700
700
1200
United States
and Canada
1997
Adequate
Intake
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
163
Ageing
Not enough is known about bone and calcium metabolism during ageing to enable calculation
of the calcium requirements of older men and women with any confidence. Calcium
absorption tends to decrease with age in both sexes (67-69) but whereas the evidence that
calcium requirement goes up at the menopause is strong, corresponding evidence about
ageing men is less convincing (32,36). Nonetheless, as a precaution we propose an extra
allowance of 300 mg/day (7.5 mmol/day) for men over 65 to bring them into line with
postmenopausal women (Table 31).
Pregnancy
The calcium content of the newborn infant is about 24 g (600 mmol). Most of this calcium is
laid down in the last trimester of pregnancy, during which the foetus retains about 240 mg (6
mmol) of calcium daily (51). There is some evidence that pregnancy is associated with an
increase in calcium absorption [associated with a rise in the plasma 1,25(OH)2 D level] (70-
72). For a maternal urinary calcium of 120 mg (3 mmol) and a maternal skin loss of 60 mg
(1.5 mmol), the absorbed calcium should be 420 mg (10.5 mmol) daily. Even at optimal
calcium absorption, the corresponding calcium intake would need to be 940 mg (23.5 mmol)
(Figure 17) and the recommended allowance would need to be 1200 mg (30 mmol)
(Table 31), which is similar to that proposed by the United States and Canada (14) (Table 32).
Lactation 
The calcium content of human milk is about 36 mg per 100 ml (9 mmol/l) (18). A lactating
woman produces about 750 ml of milk daily, which represents about 280 mg (7.0 mmol) of
calcium. For a maternal urinary calcium of 100 mg/day (2.5 mmol/day) and maternal skin loss
of 60 mg/day (1.5 mmol/day), the required absorption is 440 mg/day (11 mmol/day) – the
same as at puberty. If calcium absorption efficiency is maximal (i.e., 2 SD above the normal
mean) – possibly because of the effect of prolactin on the production of 1,25(OH)2D (72) –
the requirement would be about 1040 mg (26.0 mmol) and the recommended intake would be
about 1300 mg (32.5 mmol). However, although it is known that bone is lost during lactation
and restored after weaning (73,74), early reports that this bone loss could be prevented by
calcium supplementation (75) have not been confirmed in controlled studies (76-78). The
prevailing view now is that calcium absorption does not increase and may decrease during
lactation. It is increasingly thought that lactational bone loss is not a nutritional problem but
may be due to parathyroid hormone-related peptide secreted by the breast (79) and therefore
beyond the control of dietary calcium. In view of this uncertainty, we do not at present
recommend any extra calcium allowance during lactation; any risk to adolescent mothers is
covered by our general recommendation of 1300 mg for adolescents.
Upper limits
Because of the inverse relationship between fractional calcium absorption and calcium intake
(Figure 15), a calcium supplement of 1000 mg (2.5 mmol) added to a Western-style diet only
increases urinary calcium by about 60 mg (1.5 mmol). Urinary calcium also rises very slowly
with intake (slope of 5–10 percent) and the risk of kidney stones from dietary hypercalciuria
must therefore be negligible. In fact, it has been suggested that dietary calcium may protect
against renal calculi because it binds dietary oxalate and reduces oxalate excretion (80,81).
Toxic effects of a high calcium intake have only been described when the calcium is given as
the carbonate in very high doses; this toxicity is caused as much by the alkali as by the
calcium and is due to precipitation of calcium salts in renal tissue (milk-alkali syndrome) (82).
However, in practice we recommend an upper limit on calcium intake of 3 g (75 mmol).
164
Chapter 11: Calcium
Comparisons with other recommendations
Our recommendations in Table 31 can be compared with the current recommendations of
Australia, the United Kingdom, the European Union, and the United States and Canada in
Table 32. Our recommendations for adults are very close to those of the United States and
Canada but higher than those of the United Kingdom and Australia, which do not take into
account insensible losses, and higher than those of the European Union, which assumed 30
percent absorption of dietary calcium. The British and European values make no allowance
for ageing or menopause. Recommendations for other high-risk groups are very similar in all
five sets of recommendations except for the rather low allowance for infants by the United
States and Canada. Nonetheless, and despite this broad measure of agreement, we have some
misgivings about the application of these recommendations, all of which rely ultimately on
data from developed nations, to developing countries where other dietary constituents – such
as animal protein and sodium – and environmental factors may be very different. We shall
therefore in the next sections briefly review current knowledge about the prevalence of
osteoporosis across racial national boundaries and its relevance to calcium requirement.
Ethnic and environmental variations in the prevalence of osteoporosis 
Intakes of calcium have been known for many years to vary greatly from one country to
another, as is clearly shown in FAO food balance sheets (Table 30). Until fairly recently, it
was widely assumed that low calcium intakes had no injurious consequences. This view of the
global situation underlay the very conservative adequate calcium intakes recommended by
WHO/FAO in 1962 (2). At that time, osteoporosis was still regarded as a bone matrix
disorder and the possibility that it could be caused by calcium deficiency was barely
considered. The paradigm has changed since then. Calcium deficiency is taken more seriously
than it was and the apparent discrepancy between calcium intake and bone status across the
world has attracted more attention. In general, recent investigations have sought for evidence
of low bone density and high fracture incidence in countries where calcium intake is low;
rickets has not been looked for, but the low calcium rickets recently reported from Nigeria
(83) will no doubt attract attention.
This issue can be considered at several levels. The first level is genetic: Is there a
genetic (ethnic) difference in the prevalence of osteoporosis between racial groups within a
given society? The second level might be termed environmental-cultural (e.g., dietary): Is
there a difference in the prevalence of osteoporosis between national groups of similar ethnic
composition? The third level is environmental-geographical (e.g., latitude, affluence, and
lifestyle): Is there a difference in the prevalence of osteoporosis between countries regardless
of ethnic composition? At each of these levels, the prevalence of osteoporosis can in theory be
determined in at least two ways – from the distribution of bone density within the population
and from the prevalence of fractures, notably hip fractures. In practice, hip fracture data (or
mortality from falls for elderly people which has been used as a surrogate [84]) are more
readily available than bone densitometry.
Ethnicity
Comparisons between racial groups within countries suggest substantial racial differences in
the prevalence of osteoporosis. This was probably first noted by Trotter (85) when she
showed that bone density (weight/volume) was significantly higher in skeletons from black
than from Caucasian subjects in the United States. It was later shown that hip fracture rates
were lower in blacks than Caucasians in South Africa (86) and the United States (87). These
observations have been repeatedly confirmed (88,89) without being fully explained but appear
to be genetic in origin because the difference in bone status between blacks and Caucasians in
the United States is already apparent in childhood (90) and cannot be explained by differences
in body size (91). The difference in fracture rates between blacks and Caucasians cannot be
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
165
explained by differences in hip axis length (91); it seems to be largely or wholly due to real
differences in bone density. Comparisons between Caucasians and Samoans in New Zealand
(92) have also shown the latter to have the higher bone densities whereas the lower bone
densities of Asians than Caucasians in New Zealand are largely accounted for by differences
in body size (92). In the United States, fracture rates are lower among Japanese than among
Caucasians but may be accounted for by their shorter hip axis length (93) and their lower
incidence of falls (94). Bone density is generally lower in Asians than Caucasians within the
United States (95) but this again is largely accounted for by differences in body size (96).
There are also lower hip fracture rates for Hispanics, Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans than
Caucasians in the United States (97,98). The conclusion must be that there are probably
genetic factors influencing the prevalence of osteoporosis and fractures, but it is impossible to
exclude the role of differences in diet and lifestyle between ethnic communities within a
country.
Geography
There are wide geographical variations in hip fracture incidence, which cannot be accounted
for by ethnicity. In the United States, the age-adjusted incidence of hip fracture in Caucasian
women aged 65 and over varied with geography but was high everywhere – ranging from 700
to 1000 per 100 000 per year (99). Within Europe, the age-adjusted hip fracture rates ranged
from 280 to 730 per 100 000 women in one study (100) and from 419 to 545 per 100 000 in
another study (97) in which the comparable rates were 52.9 in Chile, 94.0 in Venezuela, and
247 in Hong Kong. In another study (101) age-adjusted hip fracture rates in women in 12
European countries ranged from 46 per 100 000 per year in Poland to 504 per 100 000 in
Sweden, with a marked gradient from south to north and from poor to rich. In Chinese
populations, the hip fracture rate is much lower in Beijing (87–97 per 100 000) than in Hong
Kong (181–353 per 100 000) (102), where the standard of living is higher. Thus there are
marked geographic variations in hip fracture rates within the same ethnic groups.
Ethnicity, environment, and lifestyle
The conclusion from the above is that there are probably ethnic differences in hip fracture
rates within countries but also environmental differences within the same ethnic group which
may complicate the story. For international comparisons on a larger scale, it is impossible to
separate genetic from environmental factors, but certain patterns emerge which are likely to
have biological meaning. The most striking of these is the positive correlation between hip
fracture rates and standard of living noted by Hegsted when he observed that osteoporosis was
largely a disease of affluent Western cultures (103). He based this conclusion on a previously
published review of hip fracture rates in 10 countries (104), which strongly suggested a
correlation between hip fracture rate and affluence. Another review of 19 regions and racial
groups (105) confirmed this by showing a gradient of age- and sex-adjusted hip fracture rates
from 31 per 100 000 in South African Bantu to 968 per 100 000 in Norway. In the analysis of
hip fracture rates in Beijing and Hong Kong referred to above (102), it was noted that the
rates in both cities were much lower than in the United States. Many other publications point
to the same conclusion – that hip fracture prevalence (and by implication osteoporosis) is
related to affluence and, consequently, to animal protein intake, as Hegsted pointed out, but
also and paradoxically to calcium intake.
The calcium paradox
The paradox that hip fracture rates are higher in developed nations where calcium intake is
high than in developing nations where calcium intake is low clearly calls for an explanation.
Hegsted (103) was probably the first to note the close relation between calcium and protein
intakes across the world (which is also true within nations [63]) and to hint at but dismiss the
166
Chapter 11: Calcium
possibility that the adverse effect of protein might outweigh the positive effect of calcium on
calcium balance. Only recently has fracture risk been shown to be a function of protein intake
in American women (106). There is also suggestive evidence that hip fracture rates (as judged
by mortality from falls in elderly people across the world) are a function of protein intake,
national income, and latitude (107). The latter is particularly interesting in view of the strong
evidence of vitamin D deficiency in hip fracture patients in the developed world (108-114)
and the successful prevention of such fractures with small doses of vitamin D and calcium
(115,116) (see Chapter 8). It is therefore possible that hip fracture rates may be related to
protein intake, vitamin D status, or both and that either of these factors could explain the
calcium paradox. We shall therefore consider how these and other nutrients (notably sodium)
affect calcium requirement.
Nutritional factors affecting calcium requirements 
The calculations of calcium requirements proposed above were based on data from developed
countries (notably the United States and Norway) and can only be applied with any
confidence to nations and populations with similar dietary cultures. Other dietary cultures
may entail different calcium requirements and call for different recommendations. In
particular, the removal or addition of any nutrient that affects calcium absorption or excretion
must have an effect on calcium requirement. Two such nutrients are sodium and animal
protein, both of which increase urinary calcium and must be presumed therefore to increase
calcium requirement. A third candidate is vitamin D because of its role in calcium
homeostasis and calcium absorption.
Sodium
It has been known at least since 1961 that urinary calcium is related to urinary sodium (117)
and that sodium administration raises calcium excretion, presumably because sodium
competes with calcium for reabsorption in the renal tubules. Regarding the quantitative
relationships between the renal handling of sodium and calcium, the filtered load of sodium is
about 100 times that of calcium (in molar terms) but the clearance of these two elements is
similar at about 1 ml/min, which yields about 99 percent reabsorption and 1 percent excretion
for both (118). However, these are approximations, which conceal the close dependence of
urinary sodium on sodium intake and the weaker dependence of urinary calcium on calcium
intake. It is an empirical fact that urinary sodium and calcium are significantly related in
normal and hypercalciuric subjects on freely chosen diets (119-122). The slope of urinary
calcium on sodium varies in published work from about 0.6 percent to 1.2 percent (in molar
terms); a representative figure is about 1 percent – that is, 100 mmol of sodium (2.3 g) takes
out about 1 mmol (40 mg) of calcium (63,120). The biological significance of this
relationship is supported by the accelerated osteoporosis induced by feeding salt to rats on
low-calcium diets (123) and the effects of salt administration and salt restriction on markers
of bone resorption in postmenopausal women (124,125). Because salt restriction lowers
urinary calcium, it is likely also to lower calcium requirement and, conversely, salt feeding is
likely to increase calcium requirement. This is illustrated in Figure 18, which shows that
lowering sodium intake by 100 mmol (2.3 g) from, for example, 150 to 50 mmol (3.45 to 1.15
g), reduces the theoretical calcium requirement from 840 mg (21 mmol) to 600 mg (15
mmol). However, the implications of this on calcium requirement across the world cannot be
computed because information about sodium intakes is available from very few countries
(126).
Protein
The positive effect of dietary protein – particularly animal protein – on urinary calcium has
also been known at least since the 1960s (127-129). One study found that 0.85 mg of calcium
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
167
was lost for each gram of protein in the diet (130). A meta-analysis of 16 studies in 154 adult
humans on protein intakes up to 200 g found that 1.2 mg of calcium was lost in the urine for
every 1g rise in dietary protein (131). A small but more focussed study showed a rise of 40
mg in urinary calcium when dietary animal protein was raised from 40 to 80 g (i.e., within the
physiological range) (132). This ratio of urinary calcium to dietary protein ratio (1mg to 1g) is
a representative value, which we have adopted. This means that a 40g reduction in animal
protein intake from 60 to 20 g (or from the developed to the developing world [Table 30])
would reduce calcium requirement by the same amount as a 2.3g reduction in dietary sodium,
i.e. from 840 to 600 mg. (Figure 18).
Figure 18
The effect of varying protein or sodium intake
on theoretical calcium requirement.
Note: In a western-style diet, absorbed calcium matches urinary and skin calcium at an intake of 840 mg as in
Figure 14. Reducing animal protein intakes by 40 g reduces the intercept value and requirement to 600 mg.
Reducing both sodium and protein reduces the intercept value to 450 mg. 
 
How animal protein exerts its effect on calcium excretion is not fully understood. A rise in
glomerular filtration rate in response to protein has been suggested as one factor (128) but this
is unlikely to be important in the steady state. The major mechanisms are thought to be the
effect of the acid load contained in animal proteins and the complexing of calcium in the renal
tubules by sulphate and phosphate ions released by protein metabolism (133,134). Urinary
calcium is significantly related to urinary phosphate (as well as to urinary sodium),
particularly in subjects on restricted calcium intakes or in the fasting state, and most of the
phosphorus in the urine of people on Western-style diets comes from animal protein in the
diet (63). Similar considerations apply to urinary sulphate but it is probably less important
than the phosphate ion because the association constant for calcium sulphate is lower than that
for calcium phosphate (135). The empirical observation that each 1 g of protein results in 1
mg of calcium in the urine agrees very well with the phosphorus content of animal protein
(about 1 percent by weight) and the observed relationship between calcium and phosphate in
the urine (63).
168
Chapter 11: Calcium
Vitamin D
One of the first observations made on vitamin D after it had been identified in 1918 (136) was
that it promoted calcium absorption (137). It is now well established that vitamin D
(synthesised in the skin under the influence of sunlight) is converted to 25OHD in the liver
and then to 1,25(OH)2D in the kidneys and that the latter metabolite controls calcium
absorption (21) (see Chapter 8). However, plasma 25OHD closely reflects vitamin D
nutritional status and because it is the substrate for the renal enzyme which produces
1,25(OH)2D, it could have an indirect effect on calcium absorption. The plasma level of 1,25-
(OH)2D is principally regulated is through increased gene expression of the 1-α-hydroxylase
(CYP1α) and not by increased 25OHD levels. This has been seen consistently in animal
studies, and the high calcium absorption (138) and high plasma 1,25-(OH) 2D (139) observed
in Gambian mothers is consistent with this type of adaptation. However, increasing latitude
may compromise vitamin D synthesis to the degree that 25OHD levels are no longer
sufficient to sustain adequate 1,25-(OH)2D levels and efficient intestinal calcium absorption,
although this theory remains unproved. Regardless of the mechanism of compromised vitamin
D homeostasis, the differences in calcium absorption efficiency have a major effect on
theoretical calcium requirement, as illustrated in Figure 18, which shows that an increase in
calcium absorption of as little as 10 percent reduces the intercept of excreted and absorbed
calcium (and therefore calcium requirement) from 840 to 680 mg. (The figure also shows the
great increase in calcium requirement that must result from any impairment of calcium
absorption.)
Implications
The major reduction in theoretical calcium requirement which follows animal protein
restriction has led us to attempt to show in Table 33 how the calcium allowances
recommended in Table 31 could be modified to apply to nations where the animal protein
intake per capita is around 20–40 g rather than around the 60–80 g in developed countries.
These hypothetical allowances take into account the need to protect children, in whom
skeletal needs are much more important determinants of calcium requirement than are urinary
losses and in whom calcium supplementation had a beneficial effect in the Gambia (140).
However, adjustment for animal protein intake has a major effect on the recommended
calcium allowances for adults as the table shows. It also brings the allowances nearer to what
the actual calcium intakes are in many parts of the world.
If sodium intakes were also lower in developing than developed nations or urinary
sodium were reduced for other reasons such as increased sweat losses, the calcium
requirement might be even lower, for example, 450 mg (Figure 18). This would be reduced
still further by any increase in calcium absorption, whether resulting from better vitamin D
status because of increased sunlight exposure or for other reasons, as illustrated in Figure 19.
Because the increase in calcium absorption in the Gambia is much more than 10 percent
(138), this is likely to have a major – although not at present calculable – effect on calcium
requirement there. However, the adjusted bone mineral density in Gambian women is
reported to be some 20 percent lower in the spine (but not in the forearm) than in British
women (141), which emphasises the need for more data from developing countries.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
169
Figure 19
The effect of varying calcium absorptive efficiency
on theoretical calcium requirement
Note: At normal calcium absorption, the intercept of urinary plus skin calcium meets absorbed calcium
at an intake of 840 mg as in Figure 14. A 10 percent reduction in calcium absorption raises the
intercept and requirement to 1150 mg and a 10 percent increase in calcium absorption reduces it to 680
mg.
Table 33
Theoretical calcium allowances based on an animal protein intake of 20–40 g
Group
mg/day
Infants and children
   0–6 months
Human milk
Cow milk
300
400
   7–12 months
450
   1–3 years
500
   4–6 years
550
   7–9 years 
700
Adolescents, 10–18 years
1000a
Adults 
   Females
19 years to menopause
Postmenopause
750
800
   Males
19–65 years
65 +
750
800
Pregnancy (last trimester)
800
Lactation
750
a Particularly during the growth spurt.
Recommended intake
170
Chapter 11: Calcium
Conclusions
Calcium is an essential nutrient that plays a vital role in neuromuscular function, many
enzyme-mediated processes, blood clotting, and providing rigidity to the skeleton by virtue of
its phosphate salts. Its non-structural roles require the strict maintenance of ionised calcium
concentration in tissue fluids at the expense of the skeleton if necessary and it is therefore the
skeleton which is at risk if the supply of calcium falls short of requirement.
Calcium requirements are essentially determined by the relationship between
absorptive efficiency and excretory rate – excretion being through the bowel, kidneys, skin,
hair, and nails. In adults, the rate of calcium absorption from the gastrointestinal tract needs to
match the rate of all losses from the body if the skeleton is to be preserved; in children and
adolescents, an extra input is needed to cover the requirements of skeletal growth.
Compared with that of other minerals, calcium economy is relatively inefficient. On
most intakes, only about 25–30 percent of dietary calcium is effectively absorbed and
obligatory calcium losses are relatively large. Absorbed calcium has to match these obligatory
losses and the dietary intake has to be large enough to ensure this rate of absorption if skeletal
damage is to be avoided. The system is subject to considerable inter-individual variation in
both calcium absorption and excretion for reasons that are not fully understood but which
include vitamin D status, sodium and protein intake, age, and menopausal status in women.
Although it needs to be emphasised that calcium deficiency and negative calcium balance
must sooner or later lead to osteoporosis, this does not mean that all osteoporosis can be
attributed to calcium deficiency. On the contrary, there may be more osteoporosis in the world
from other causes. Nonetheless, it would probably be generally agreed that any form of
osteoporosis must inevitably be aggravated by negative external calcium balance. Such
negative balance – even for short periods – is prejudicial because it takes so much longer to
rebuild bone than to destroy it. Bone that is lost, even during short periods of calcium
deficiency, is only slowly replaced when adequate amounts of calcium become available.
In seeking to define advisable calcium intakes on the basis of physiologic studies and
clinical observations, nutrition authorities have to rely largely on data from developed nations
living at relatively high latitudes. Although it is now possible to formulate recommendations
that are appropriate to different stages in the life cycle of the populations of these nations,
extrapolation from these figures to other cultures and nutritional environments can only be
tentative and must rely on what is known of nutritional and environmental effects on calcium
absorption and excretion. Nonetheless, we have made an attempt in this direction, knowing
that our speculative calculations may be incorrect because of other variables not yet
identified.
No reference has been made in this account to the possible beneficial effects of
calcium in the prevention or treatment of pre-eclampsia (142), colon cancer (143), or
hypertension (144) and no attempt has been made to use these conditions as endpoints on
which to base calcium intakes. In each of the above conditions, epidemiologic data suggested
an association with calcium intake, and experimentation with increased calcium intakes has
now been tried. In each case the results have been disappointing, inconclusive, or negative
(145-147) and have stirred controversy (148-150). Because there is no clear consensus about
optimal calcium intake for prevention or treatment of these conditions and also no clear
mechanistic ideas on how dietary calcium intakes affect them, it is not possible to allow for
the effect of health outcomes in these areas on our calcium recommendations. However,
although the anecdotal information and positive effects of calcium observed in these three
conditions cannot influence our recommendations, they do suggest that generous calcium
allowances may confer other benefits besides protecting the skeleton. Similarly, no reference
has been made to the effects of physical activity, alcohol, smoking, or other known risk
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
171
factors on bone status because the effects of these variables on calcium requirement are
beyond the realm of simple calculation.
Future research  
Future research should: 
• recognise that there is an overwhelming need for more studies of calcium metabolism in
developing countries;
• investigate further the cultural, geographical, and genetic bases for differences in calcium
intakes in different groups in developing nations; 
• establish the validity of different recommended calcium intakes based on animal protein
and sodium intakes;
• clarify the role of dietary calcium in pre-eclampsia, colon cancer, and hypertension; and 
• investigate the relationship of latitude, sun exposure, and synthesis of vitamin D with
intestinal calcium absorption in different geographical locations.
172
Chapter 11: Calcium
1. FAO. 1974.  Handbook on Human Nutritional Requirements. Rome, FAO.
2. FAO/WHO Expert Group. 1962. Calcium Requirements. Rome, FAO.
3. Albright, F. & Reifenstein, E.C. 1948. The Parathyroid Glands and Metabolic Bone
Disease. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins
4. Nordin, B.E.C. 1960. Osteomalacia, osteoporosis and calcium deficiency. Clin. Orthop.,
17: 235-258.
5. Young, M.M. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1967.Effects of natural and artificial menopause on
plasma and urinary calcium and phosphorus. Lancet, 2: 118-120.
6. Stepan, J.J., Posphichal, J., Presl, J. & Pacovsky, V. 1987. Bone loss and biochemical
indices of bone remodeling in surgically induced postmenopausal women. Bone 8:
279-284.
7. Kelly, P.J., Pocock, N.A., Sambrook, P.N. & Eisman, J.A. 1989. Age and
menopause-related changes in indices of bone turnover. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 69:
1160-1165.
8. Christiansen, C., Christensen, M.S., Larsen, N-E. & Transbøl, I.B. 1982.
Pathophysiological mechanisms of estrogen effect on bone metabolism. Dose-response
relationships in early postmenopausal women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 55: 1124-1130.
9. Parfitt, A.M. 1990. Osteomalacia and related disorders. In: Metabolic Bone Disease and
Clinically Related Disorders. Second Edition. Avioli, L.V., Krane, S.M., eds. p. 329-396.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 
10. Need, A.G. Corticosteroid hormones. In: Metabolic Bone and Stone Disease. Third
Edition. Nordin, B.E.C., Need, A.G., Morris, H.A., eds. p.70-78. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone.
11. Horowitz, M. 1993. Osteoporosis in men. In: Metabolic Bone and Stone Disease. Third
Edition. Nordin, B.E.C., Need, A.G., Morris, H.A., eds. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
12. Lips, P., Netelenbos, J.C. & Jongen, M.J.M. 1982. Histomorphometric profile and
vitamin D status in patients with femoral neck fracture. Metab. Bone Dis. Relat. Res., 4:
85-93.
13. Truswell, S. 1983. Recommended dietary intakes around the world. Report by Committee
1/5 of the International Union of Nutritional Sciences. Nutr. Abstracts  Revs., 53: 939-
1119.
14. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. 1997. Dietary reference intakes for
calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, vitamin D, and fluoride. Washington DC: National
Academy Press.
15. Department of Health. 1991. Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrients
for the United Kingdom. Report of the Panel on Dietary Reference Values of the
Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy. London: HMSO.
16. Directorate-General Industry. 1993. Reports of the Scientific Committee for Food
(Thirty-first series). Nutrient and energy intakes for the European Community.
Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
17. National Health and Medical Research Council. 1991. Recommended Dietary Intakes
for use in Australia. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia.
18. Nordin, B.E.C. 1976. Nutritional considerations. In: Calcium, Phosphate and Magnesium
Metabolism. Nordin, B.E.C., ed. p. 1-35. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
173
19. Robertson, W.G. & Marshall, R.W. 1981. Ionised calcium in body fluids. Crit. Revs.
Clin. Lab. Sci., 15: 85-125.
20. Brown, E.M. & Hebert, S.C. 1997. Calcium-receptor-regulated parathyroid and renal
function. Bone, 20: 303-309.
21. Jones, G., Strugnell, S.A. & DeLuca, H.F. 1998. Current understanding of the molecular
actions of vitamin D. Physiol. Revs., 78: 1193-1231.
22. Wu, D.D., Boyd, R.D., Fix, T.J. & Burr, D.B. 1990. Regional patterns of bone loss and
altered bone remodeling in response to calcium deprivation in laboratory rabbits. Calcif.
Tissue Int., 47: 18-23.
23. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1991.  Production Yearbook
Vol. 44, 1990. Rome, FAO.
24. Ireland, P. & Fordtran, J.S. 1973. Effect of dietary calcium and age on jejunal calcium
absorption in Humans studied by intestinal perfusion. J. Clin. Investig., 52: 2672-81.
25. Heaney, R.P., Saville, P.D. & Recker, R.R. 1975. Calcium absorption as a function of
calcium intake. J. Lab. Clin. Med., 85: 881-890.
26. Wilkinson, R. 1976. Absorption of calcium, phosphorus and magnesium. Calcium,
Phosphate and Magnesium Metabolism. Nordin, B.E.C. ed. p. 36-112. Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone. 
27. Marshall, D.H. 1976. Calcium and phosphate kinetics Calcium, Phosphate and
Magnesium Metabolism. Nordin, B.E.C. ed. p. 257-297. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
28. Heaney, R.P. & Skillman, T.G. 1964. Secretion and excretion of calcium by the Human
gastrointestinal tract. J. Lab. Clin. Med., 64: 29-41.
29. Nordin, B.E.C., Horsman, A. & Aaron, J. 1976. Diagnostic procedures. Calcium,
Phosphate and Magnesium Metabolism. Nordin, B.E.C. ed. p. 469-524. Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone. 
30. Marshall, D.H., Nordin, B.E.C. & Speed, R. 1976. Calcium, phosphorus and magnesium
requirement. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 35: 163-173.
31. Nordin, B.E.C. & Marshall, D.H. 1988. Dietary requirements for calcium. In: Calcium in
Human Biology. Nordin, B.E.C., ed. p. 447-471. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,.
32. Bogdonoff, M.D., Shock, N.W. & Nichols, M.P. Calcium, phosphorus, nitrogen, and
potassium balance studies in the aged male. J. Gerontol. 1953;8:272-288.
33. Clarkson, E.M., Durrant, C. & Phillips, M.E., Gower, P.E., Jewkes, R.F., De
Wardener, H.E. 1970. The effect of a high intake of calcium and phosphate in normal
subjects and patients with chronic renal failure. Clin. Sci., 39: 693-704.
34. Johnston, F.A., McMillan, T.J. & Derby Falconer, G. 1952. Calcium retained by young
women before and after adding spinach to the diet. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 28: 933-938.
35. Malm, O.J. 1958. Calcium requirement and adaptation in adult men. Scand. J. Clin. Lab.
Investig., 10(Suppl 36):1-289.
36. Owen, E.C., Irving, J.T. & Lyall, A. 1940. The calcium requirements of older male
subjects with special reference to the genesis of senile osteoporosis. Acta Medica. Scand.,
103: 235-250.
37. Steggerda, F.R. & Mitchell, H.H. 1939. The calcium requirement of adult man and the
utilisation of the calcium in milk and in calcium gluconate. J. Nutr., 17: 253-262.
38. Steggerda, F.R. & Mitchell, H.H. Further experiments on the calcium requirement of
adult man and the utilisation of the calcium in milk. J. Nutr., 21: 577-588.
174
Chapter 11: Calcium
39. Steggerda, F.R. & Mitchell, H.H. 1946. Variability in the calcium metabolism and
calcium requirements of adult Human subjects. J. Nutr., 31: 407-422.
40. Gallagher, J.C., Riggs, B.L. & Eisman, J. 1979. Intestinal calcium absorption and serum
vitamin D metabolites in normal subjects and osteoporotic patients. J. Clin. Investig., 64:
729-736.
41. Wishart, J.M., Horowitz, M., Need, A.G., Scopacasa, F., Morris, H.A., Clifton, P.M.
& Nordin, B.E.C. 1997. Relations between calcium intake, calcitriol, polymorphisms of
the vitamin D receptor gene, and calcium absorption in premenopausal women. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 65: 798-802.
42. MacFadyen, I.J., Nordin, B.E.C., Smith, D.A., Wayne, D.J. & Rae, S.L. 1965. Effect of
variation in dietary calcium on plasma concentration and urinary excretion of calcium. Br.
Med. J., 1: 161-164.
43. Heaney, R.P., Recker, R.R. & Ryan, R.A. 1999. Urinary calcium in perimenopausal
women: normative values. Osteoporos. Int., 9: 13-18.
44. Charles, P., Taagehøj., F., Jensen, L., Mosekilde, L. & Hansen, H.H. 1983. Calcium
metabolism evaluated by Ca45 kinetics: estimation of dermal calcium loss. Clin. Sci., 65:
415-422.
45. Hasling, C., Charles, P., Taagehøj., J. & Mosekilde, L. 1990. Calcium metabolism in
postmenopausal osteoporosis: the influence of dietary calcium and net absorbed calcium. J.
Bone Miner. Res., 5: 939-946.
46. Mitchell, H.H. & Curzon, E.G. 1939. The dietary requirements of calcium and its
significance. Actualites Scientifique et Industrielles No. 771. p.36-101. Paris: Hermann. 
47. Hegsted, J.M., Moscoso, I. & Collazos, C.H.C. 1952. Study of minimum calcium
requirements by adult men. J. Nutr., 46:181-201.
48. Heaney, R.P., Recker, R.R. & Saville, P.D. 1978. Menopausal changes in calcium
balance performance. J. Lab. Clin. Med., 92: 953-963.
49. Matkovic, V. & Heaney, R.P. 1992. Calcium balance during Human growth: evidence for
threshold behavior. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 55: 992-996.
50. Nordin, B.E.C., Need, A.G., Morris, H.A. & Horowitz, M. 1999. Biochemical variables
in pre- and postmenopausal women: reconciling the calcium and estrogen hypotheses.
Osteoporos. Int., 9: 351-357.
51. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Nutrition. 1978. Calcium requirements
in infancy and childhood. Pediatrics, 62: 826-832.
52. Williams, M.L., Rose, C.S., Morrow, G., Sloan, S.E. & Barness, L.A. 1970. Calcium
and fat absorption in neonatal period. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 23: 1322-1330.
53. Hanna, F.M., Navarrete, D.A. & Hsu, F.A. 1970. Calcium-fatty acid absorption in term
infants fed Human milk and prepared formulas simulating Human milk. Pediatrics, 45:
216-224.
54. Widdowson, E.M. 1965. Absorption and excretion of fat, nitrogen, and minerals from
“filled” milks by babies one week old. Lancet, 2: 1099-1105.
55. Shaw, J.C.L. 1976. Evidence for defective skeletal mineralisation in low birthweight
infants: the absorption of calcium and fat. Pediatrics, 57: 16-25.
56. Widdowson, E.M., McCance, R.A., Harrison, G.E. & Sutton, A. 1963. Effect of giving
phosphate supplements to breast-fed babies on absorption and excretion of calcium,
strontium, magnesium and phosphorus. Lancet, 2:1250-51.
57. Leitch, I. & Aitken, F.C. 1959. The estimation of calcium requirements: a re-
examination. Nutr. Abstracts  Revs., 29: 393-411.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
175
58. Matkovic, V. 1991. Calcium metabolism and calcium requirements during skeletal
modeling and consolidation of bone mass. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 45S-260S.
59. Abrams, S.A. & Stuff, J.E. 1994. Calcium metabolism in girls: current dietary intakes
lead to low rates of calcium absorption and retention during puberty. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 60:
739-743.
60. Truswell, A.S. & Darnton-Hill, I. 1981. Food habits of adolescents. Nutr. Revs. 39:
73-88.
61. Marino, D.D. & King, J.C. 1980. Nutritional concerns during adolescence. Pediatr. Clin.
N. Am .J., 27: 125-139.
62. Prince, R.L., Dick, I. & Devine, A. 1995. The effects of menopause and age in calcitropic
hormones: a cross-sectional study of 655 healthy women aged 35 to 90. J. Bone Miner.Res,
10: 835-842.
63. Nordin, B.E.C. & Polley, K.J. 1987. Metabolic consequences of the menopause. A cross-
sectional, longitudinal, and intervention study on 557 normal postmenopausal women.
Calcif. Tissue Int., 41: S1-S60.
64. Heaney, R.P., Recker, R.R., Stegman, M.R. & Moy, A.J. 1989. Calcium absorption in
women: relationships to calcium intake, estrogen status, and age. J. Bone Miner. Res, 4:
469-475.
65. Nordin, B.E.C. 1997. Calcium and osteoporosis. Nutrition, 13: 664-686.
66. Nieves, J.W., Komar, L., Cosman, F. & Lindsay, R. 1998. Calcium potentiates the effect
of estrogen and calcitonin on bone mass: review and analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67: 18-
24.
67. Morris, H.A., Need, A.G., Horowitz, M., O'Loughlin, P.D. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1991.
Calcium absorption in normal and osteoporotic postmenopausal women. Calcif. Tissue Int.,
49: 240-243.
68. Ebeling, P.R., Yergey, A.L. & Vleira, N.E. et al. 1994. Influence of age on effects of
endogenous 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D on calcium absorption in normal women. Calcif.
Tissue Int., 55: 330-334.
69. Need, A.G., Morris, H.A., Horowitz, M., Scopacasa, F. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1998.
Nordin. Intestinal calcium absorption in men with spinal osteoporosis. Clin. Endocrinol.,
48: 163-168.
70. Heaney, R.P. & Skillman, T.G. 1971. Calcium metabolism in normal Human pregnancy.
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 33: 661-670.
71. Kent, G.N., Price, R.I. & Gutteridge, D.H. 1991. The efficiency of intestinal calcium
absorption is increased in late pregnancy but not in established lactation. Calcif. Tissue Int.,
48: 293-295.
72. Kumar, 
R., 
Cohen, 
W.R., 
Silva, 
P. 
& 
Epsteain, 
F.H. 
1979. 
Elevated
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D plasma levels in normal Human pregnancy and lactation. J. Clin.
Investig., 63: 342-344.
73. Kent G.N., Price, R.I. & Gutteridge, D.H. 1990. Human lactation: forearm trabecular
bone loss, increased bone turnover, and renal conservation of calcium and inorganic
phosphate with recovery of bone mass following weaning. J. Bone Miner. Res, 5: 361-369.
74. López, J.M., González, G., Reyes, V., Campino, C. & Díaz, S. 1996. Bone turnover and
density in healthy women during breastfeeding and after weaning. Osteoporos. Int., 6:
153-159.
75. Chan, G.M., McMurry, M., Westover, K., Engelbert-Fenton, K & Thomas, M.R.
1987. Effects of increased dietary calcium intake upon the calcium and status of lactating
adolescent and adult women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 46: 319-323.
176
Chapter 11: Calcium
76. Prentice, A., Jarjou, L.M.A. & Cole, T.J. 1995. Calcium requirements of lactating
Gambian mothers: effects of a calcium supplement on breast-milk calcium concentration,
maternal bone mineral content and urinary calcium excretion. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 62: 58-67.
77. Kalkwarf, H.J., Specker, B.L., Bianchi, D.C., Ranz, J. & Ho,M. 1997. The effect of
calcium supplementation on bone density during lactation and after weaning. N. Engl. J.
Med., 337: 523-528.
78. Allen, L.H. 1998. Women's dietary calcium requirements are not increased by pregnancy
or lactation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67: 591-592.
79. Sowers, M.F., Hollis, B.W. & Shapiro, B. 1996. Elevated parathyroid hormone-related
peptide associated with lactation and bone density loss. JAMA, 276: 549-554.
80. Curhan, G.C., Willett, W.C., Speizer, F.E., Spiegelman, D. & Stampfer, M.J. 1997.
Comparison of dietary calcium with supplemental calcium and other nutrients as factors
affecting the risk for kidney stones in women. Ann. Internal Med., 126: 497-504.
81. Curhan, G.C., Willett, W.C., Rimm, E.B. & Stampfer, M.J. 1993. A prospective study
of dietary calcium and other nutrients and the risk of symptomatic kidney stones. N. Engl.
J. Med., 328: 833-838.
82. Burnett, C.H., Commons, R.R., Albright, F. & Howard, J.E. 1949. Hypercalcaemia
without hypercalciuria or hypophosphatemia, calcinosis and renal insufficiency. A
syndrome following prolonged intake of milk and alkali. N. Engl. J. Med., 240: 787-794.
83. Thacher, T.D., Fischer, P.R. & Pettifor, J.M. 1999. A comparison of calcium, vitamin
D, or both for nutritional rickets in Nigerian children. N. Engl. J. Med.. , 341: 563-568.
84. Eddy, T.P. 1972. Deaths from domestic falls and fractures. Br. J. Prev. Soc. Med., 26:
173-179.
85. Trotter, M., Broman, G.E. & Peterson, R.R. 1960. Densities of bones of white and
Negro skeletons. J. Bone Joint Surg. 1960;42-A:50-59.
86. Solomon, L. 1968. Osteoporosis and fracture of the femoral neck in the South African
Bantu. J. Bone Joint Surg., 50-B-2:2-13.
87. Bollet, A.J., Engh, G. & Parson, W. 1965. Sex and race incidence of hip fractures. Arch.
Internal Med., 116:191-194.
88. Cohn, S.H., Abesamis, C., Yasumara, S., Aloia, J.F., Zanzi, I. & Ellis, K.J. 1977.
Comparative skeletal mass and radial bone mineral content in black and white women.
Metabolism, 26: 171-178.
89. DeSimone, D.P., Stevens, J., Edwards, J., Shary, J., Gordon, L. & Bell, N.H. 1989.
Influence of body habitus and race on bone mineral density of the midradius, hip, and spine
in aging women. J. Bone Miner. Res., 5: 827-830.
90. Bell, N.H., Shary, J., Stevens, J., Garza, M., Gordon, L. & Edwards, J. 1991.
Demonstration that bone mass is greater in black than in white children. J. Bone Miner.
Res., 6: 719-723.
91. Nelson, D.A., Jacobsen, G., Barondess,  D.A. & Parfitt, A.M. 1995. Ethnic differences
in regional bone density, hip axis length, and lifestyle variables among healthy black and
white men. J. Bone Miner. Res., 10: 782-787.
92. Cund, T., Cornish, J., Evans, M.C., Gamble, G., Stapleton, J. & Reid, I.R. 1995.
Sources of interracial variation in bone mineral density. J. Bone Miner. Res., 10: 368-373.
93. Cummings, S.R., Cauley, J.A., Palermo, L., Ross, P.D., Wasnich,R.D., Black, D. &
Faulkner, K.G. 1994. Racial differences in hip axis lengths might explain racial
differences in rates of hip fracture. Osteoporos. Int., 4: 226-229.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
177
94. Davis, J.W., Ross, P.D., Nevitt, M.C. & Wasnich, R.D. 1997. Incidence rates of falls
among Japanese men and women living in Hawaii. J. Clin. Epidemiol.,  50: 589-594.
95. Yano, K., Wasnich, R.D., Vogel, J.M. & Heilbrun, L.K. 1984. Bone mineral
measurements among middle-aged and elderly Japanese residents in Hawaii. Am. J.
Epidemiol., 119: 751-764.
96. Ross, P.D., He, Y-F. & Yates, A.J. 1996. Body size accounts for most differences in
bone density between Asian and caucasian women. Calcif. Tissue Int., 59: 339-343.
97. Silverman, S.L. & Madison, R.E. 1988. Decreased incidence of hip fracture in
Hispanics, Asians, and blacks: California hospital discharge data. Am. J. Public Health,
78: 1482-1483.
98. Lauderdale, D.S., Jacobsen, S.J., Furner, S.E., Levy, P.S., Brody, J.A. & Goldberg,
J. 1997. Hip fracture incidence among elderly Asian-American populations. Am. J.
Epidemiol., 146: 502-509.
99. Villa, M.L. & Nelson, L. 1996. Race, ethnicity and osteoporosis. In: Osteoporosis.
Marcus, R., Feldman, D., Kelsey, J., eds. p. 435-447. San Diego: Academic Press. 
100. Bacon, W.E., Maggi, S. & Looker, A. 1996. International comparison of hip fracture
rates in 1988-89. Osteoporos. Int., 6: 69-75.
101. Johnell, A., Gullberg, B., Allander, E. & Kanis, J.A. 1992. The apparent incidence of
hip fracture in Europe: A study of national register sources. Osteoporos. Int., 2: 298-302.
102. Xu, L., Lu, A., Zhao, X., Chen, X. & Cummings, S.R. 1996. Very low rates of hip
fracture in Beijing, People's Republic of China: the Beijing Osteoporosis Project. Am. J.
Epidemiol., 144: 901-907.
103. Hegsted, D.M. 1986. Calcium and osteoporosis. J. Nutr., 116: 2316-2319.
104. Gallagher, J.C., Melton, L.J., Riggs, B.L. & Bergstrath, E. 1980. Epidemiology of
fractures of the proximal femur in Rochester, Minnesota. Clin Orthop., 150: 163-171.
105. Maggi, S., Kelsey, J.L., Litvak, J. & Heyse, S.P. 1991. Incidence of hip fractures in the
elderly. A cross-national analysis. Osteoporos. Int., 1: 232-241.
106. Feskanich, D., Willett, W.C., Stampfer, M.J. & Colditz G.A. 1996. Protein
consumption and bone fractures in women. Am. J. Epidemiol., 143: 472-479.
107. Nordin, B.E.C. 1997. Calcium in health and disease. Food, Nutrition and Agriculture,
20: 13-24.
108. Aaron, J.E., Gallagher, J.C., Anderson, J., Stasiak, L., Longton, E.B. & Nordin,
B.E.C. 1974. Frequency of osteomalacia and osteoporosis in fractures of the proximal
femur. Lancet, 2: 229-233.
109. Aaron, J.E., Gallagher, J.C. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1974. Seasonal variation of histological
osteomalacia in femoral neck fractures. Lancet, 2: 84-85.
110. Baker, M.R., McDonnell, H., Peacock, M. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1979. Plasma 25-
hydroxy vitamin D concentrations in patients with fractures of the femoral neck. Br.
Med. J., 1: 589.
111. Morris, H.A., Morrison, G.W., Burr, M., Thomas, D.W. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1984.
Vitamin D and femoral neck fractures in elderly South Australian women. Med. J. Aust.,
140: 519-521.
112. Von Knorring, J., Slatis, P., Weber, T.H. & Helenius, T. 1982. Serum levels of 25-
hydroxy vitamin D, 24,25-dihydroxy vitamin D and parathyroid hormone in patients with
femoral neck fracture in southern Finland. Clin. Endocrinol., 17: 189-194.
113. Pun, K.K., Wong, F.H. & Wang, C. 1990. Vitamin D status among patients with
fractured neck of femur in Hong Kong. Bone, 11: 365-368.
178
Chapter 11: Calcium
114. Lund, B., Sorenson, O.H. & Christensen, A.B. 1975. 25-hydroxycholecalciferol and
fractures of the proximal femur. Lancet, 2: 300-302.
115. Chapuy, M.C., Arlot M.E. & Duboeuf, F. 1992. Vitamin D3 and calcium to prevent hip
fractures in elderly women. N. Engl. J. Med., 327: 1637-1642.
116. Boland, R. 1986. Role of vitamin D in skeletal muscle function. Endocr. Revs., 7:
434-448.
117. Walser, M. 1961. Calcium clearance as a function of sodium clearance in the dog. Am. J.
Physiol., 200: 769-773.
118. Nordin, B.E. & Need, A.G. 1994. The effect of sodium on calcium requirement.
Advances in Nutritional Research. Volume 9 Nutrition and Osteoporosis. Draper, H.H.
ed. p.209-230. New York: Plenum Press. 
119. Goulding, A. & Lim, P.E. 1983. Effects of varying dietary salt intake on the fasting
excretion of sodium, calcium and hydroxyproline in young women. NZ Med. J., 96:
853-854.
120. Sabto, J., Powell, M.J., Breidahi, M.J. & Gurr, F.W. 1984. Influence of urinary
sodium on calcium excretion in normal individuals. Med. J. Aust., 140: 354-356.
121. Kleeman, C.R., Bohannan, J., Bernstein, D., Ling, S. & Maxwell, M.H. 1964. Effect
of variations in sodium intake on calcium excretion in normal Humans. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Bio. (NY), 115: 29-32.
122. Epstein, F.H. 1968. Calcium and the kidney. Am. J. Med., 45: 700-714.
123. Goulding, A. & Campbell, D. 1983. Dietary NaCl loads promote calciuria and bone loss
in adult oophorectomized rats consuming a low calcium diet. J. Nutr., 113: 1409-1414.
124. McParland, B.E., Goulding, A. & Campbell, A.J. 1989. Dietary salt affects
biochemical markers of resorption and formation of bone in elderly women. Br. Med. J.,
299: 834-835.
125. Need, A.G., Morris, H.A., Cleghorn, D.B., DeNichilo, D., Horowitz, M. & Nordin,
B.E.C. 1991. Effect of salt restriction on urine hydroxyproline excretion in
postmenopausal women. Arch. Internal Med., 151: 757-759.
126. Elliott, P., Stamler, J., Nichols, R., Dyer, A.R., Stamler, R., Kesteloot, H. & Marmot,
M. 1996. Intersalt revisited: further analyses of 24 hour sodium excretion and blood
pressure within and across populations. Br. Med. J., 312: 1249-1253.
127. Hegsted, M. & Linkswiler, H.M. 1981. Long-term effects of level of protein intake on
calcium metabolism in young adult women. J. Nutr., 111: 244-251.
128. Margen, S., Chu, J-Y., Kaufmann, N.A. & Callow, D.H. 1974. Studies in calcium
metabolism. I. The calciuretic effect of dietary protein. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 27:584-589.
129. Linkswiler, H.M., Zemel, M.B., Hegsted, M. & Schuette, S. 1981. Protein-induced
hypercalciuria. Federation Proc., 40: 2429-2433.
130. Heaney, R.P. 1993. Protein intake and the calcium economy. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 93:
1259-1260.
131. Kerstetter, J.E. & Allen, L.H. 1989. Dietary protein increases urinary calcium. J. Nutr.,
120: 134-136.
132. Nordin, B.E.C., Morris, H.A., Need, A.G. & Horowitz M. 1993. Dietary calcium and
osteoporosis. Second WHO Symposium on Health Issues for the 21st Century: Nutrition
and Quality of Life. Kobe.
133. Schuette,  S.A., Zemel, M.B. & Linkswiler, H.M. 1980. Studies on the mechanism of
protein-induced hypercalciuria in older men and women. J. Nutr., 110: 305-315.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
179
134. Schuette, S.A., Hegsted, M., Zemel, M.B. & Linkswiler, H.M. 1981. Renal acid,
urinary cyclic AMP, and hydroxyproline excretion as affected by level of protein, sulfur
amino acid, and phosphorus intake. J. Nutr., 111: 2106-2116.
135. Need, A.G., Horowitz, M. & Nordin, B.E.C. 1998. Is the effect of dietary protein on
urine calcium due to its phosphate content? Bone, 23(Suppl):SA344.
136. Mellanby, E. 1918. The part played by an "accessory factor" in the production of
experimental rickets. A further demonstration of the part played by accessory food
factors in the aetiology of rickets. J. Physiol., 52: 11-53.
137. Telfer, S.V. 1926. Studies in calcium and phosphorus metabolism. Q. J. Med., 20:1-6.
138. Fairweather-Tait, S., Prentice, A., Heumann, K.G. et al. 1995. Effect of calcium
supplements and stage of lactation on the calcium absorption efficiency of lactating
women accustomed to low calcium intakes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 62:1188-1192.
139. Prentice, A., Jarjou, L.M.A., Stirling, D.M., Buffenstein, R. & Fairweather-Tait, S.
1998. Biochemical markers of calcium and bone metabolism during 18 months of
lactation in Gambian women accustomed to a low calcium intake and in those consuming
a calcium supplement. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 83: 1059-1066.
140. Dibba, B., Prentice, A., Ceesay, M., Stirling, D.M., Cole, T.J. & Poskitt, E.M.E.
2000. Effect of calcium supplementation on bone mineral accretion in Gambian children
accustomed to a low calcium diet. Am. J. Clin.. Nutr., 71: 544-549.
141. Aspray, T.J., Prentice, A., Cole, T.J., Saw, Y., Reeve, J. & Francis, R.M. 1996. Low
bone mineral content is common but osteoporotic fractures are rare in elderly rural
Gambian women. J. Bone Miner. Res., 11: 1019-1025.
142. Bucher, H.C., Guyatt, G.H. & Cook, R.J. 1996. Effect of calcium supplementation on
pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia. JAMA, 275:1113-17.
143. Garland, C.F., Garland, F.C. & Gorham, E.D. 1991. Can colon cancer incidence and
death rates be reduced with calcium and vitamin D? Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54(Suppl):193s-
201s.
144. McCarron, D.A. 1997. Role of adequate dietary calcium intake in the prevention and
management of salt-sensitive hypertension. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 65(Suppl): 712s-716s.
145. Joffe, G.M., Esterlitz, J.R., Levine, R.J., Clemens, J.D., Ewell, M.G., Siba, I.B.M. &
Catalano, P.M. 1998. The relationship between abnormal glucose tolerance and
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in healthy nulliparous women. Calcium for
Preeclampsia Prevention (CPEP) Study Group. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol, 179:1032-1037.
146. Martinez, M.E. & Willett, W.C. 1998. Calcium, vitamin D, and colorectal cancer: a
review of the epidemiologic evidence. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev., 7: 163-168.
147. Resnick, L.M. 1999. The role of dietary calcium in hypertension: a hierarchical
overview. Am. J. Hypertens., 12: 99-112.
148. DerSimonian, R. & Levine, R.J. 1999. Resolving discrepancies between a meta-
analysis and a subsequent large controlled trial. JAMA, 282: 664-670.
149. Mobarhan, S. 1999. Calcium and the colon: recent findings. Nutr. Revs., 57: 124-126.
150. McCarron, D.A. & Reusser, M.E. Finding consensus in the dietary calcium-blood
pressure debate. J. Am. Coll. Nutr., 18(Suppl): 398S-405S.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
181
Summary of the human metabolic processes requiring iodine
A
t present, the only physiologic role known for iodine in the human body is in the
synthesis of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland. Therefore, the dietary requirement
of iodine is determined by normal thyroxine (T4) production by the thyroid gland
without stressing the thyroid iodide trapping mechanism or raising thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH) levels.
Iodine from the diet is absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Dietary iodine is
converted into the iodide ion before it is absorbed. The iodide ion is bio-available and
absorbed totally from food and water. This is not true for iodine within thyroid hormones
ingested for therapeutic purposes. Iodine enters the circulation as plasma inorganic iodide,
which is cleared from circulation by the thyroid and kidney. The iodide is used by the thyroid
gland for synthesis of thyroid hormones, and the kidney excretes iodine with urine. The
excretion of iodine in the urine is a good measure of iodine intake. In a normal population
with no evidence of clinical iodine deficiency either in the form of endemic goitre or endemic
cretinism, urinary iodine excretion reflects the average daily iodine requirement. Therefore,
for determining the iodine requirements, the important indexes are serum T4 and TSH levels
(indicating normal thyroid status) and urinary iodine excretion. The simplified diagram of
metabolic circuit of iodine is given in Figure 20 (1).
Overview of significant scientific information 
All biologic actions of iodide are attributed to the thyroid hormones. The major thyroid
hormone secreted by the thyroid gland is T4 (tetra-iodo-thyronine). T4 in circulation is taken
up by the cells and is de-iodinated by the enzyme 5' prime-mono-de-iodinase in the cytoplasm
to convert it into tri-iodo-thyronine (T3), the active form of thyroid hormone. T3 traverses to
the nucleus and binds to the nuclear receptor. All the biologic actions of T3 are mediated
through the binding to the nuclear receptor, which controls the transcription of a particular
gene to bring about the synthesis of a specific protein.
The physiologic actions of thyroid hormones can be categorised as 1) growth and
development and 2) control of metabolic processes in the body. Thyroid hormones play a
major role in the growth and development of brain and central nervous systems in humans
from the 15th week of gestation to age 3 years. If iodine deficiency exists during this period
and results in thyroid hormone deficiency, the consequence is derangement in the
development of brain and central nervous system. These derangements are irreversible, the
most serious form being that of cretinism. The effect of iodine deficiency at different stages of
life is given in Table 34 (2).
The other physiologic role of thyroid hormone is to control several metabolic
processes in the body. These include carbohydrate, fat, protein, vitamin, and mineral
metabolism. For example, thyroid hormone increases energy production, increases lipolysis,
and regulates neoglucogenesis, and glycolysis.
Chapter 12
Iodine
182
Chapter 12: Iodine
Figure 20
Simplified diagram of the metabolic circuit of iodine
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
183
Table 34
The spectrum of iodine deficiency disorders
Life stage
 Effects
Foetus
Abortions
Stillbirths
Congenital anomalies
Increased perinatal mortality
Increased infant mortality
Neurological cretinism: mental deficiency, deaf
mutism, spastic diplegia, and squint
Myxedematous cretinism: mental deficiency and
dwarfism
Psychomotor defects
Neonate
Neonatal goitre
Neonatal hypothyroidism
Child and Adolescent
Goitre
Juvenile hypothyroidism
Impaired mental function
Retarded physical development
Adult
Goitre with its complications
Hypothyroidism
Impaired mental function
Population at risk
Iodine deficiency affects all stages of human life, from the intra-uterine stage to old age, as
shown in Table 34. However, pregnant women, lactating women, women of reproductive age,
and children younger than 3 years are considered to be at high risk (3). During foetal and
neonatal growth and development, iodine deficiency leads to irreversible damage to the brain
and central nervous system.
Dietary sources
The iodine content of food depends on the iodine content of the soil in which it is grown. The
iodine present in the upper crust of earth is leached by glaciation and repeated flooding and is
carried to the sea. Sea water is, therefore, a rich source of iodine (4). The seaweed located
near coral reefs has an inherent biologic capacity to concentrate iodine from the sea. The reef
fish which thrive on seaweed are rich in iodine. Thus, a population consuming seaweed and
reef fish has a high intake of iodine, as the case in Japan. The amount of iodine intake by the
Japanese is in the range of 2–3 mg/day (4). In several areas of Asia, Africa, Latin America,
and parts of Europe, iodine intake varies from 20 to 80 µg/day. In the United States and
Canada and some parts of Europe, the intake is around 500 µg/day. The average iodine
content of foods (fresh and dry basis) as reported by Koutras et al. (4) is given in Table 35.
184
Chapter 12: Iodine
Table 35
Average iodine content of foods (in µg/g)
Food
Fresh basis
Dry basis
Fish (fresh water)
30
17–40
116
68–194
Fish (marine)
832
163–3180
3715
471–4591
Shellfish
798
308–1300
3866
1292–4987
Meat
50
27–97
—
—
Milk
47
35–56
—
—
Eggs
93
—
—
—
Cereal grains
47
22–72
65
34–92
Fruits
18
10–29
154
62–277
Legumes
30
23–36
234
223–245
Vegetables
29
12–201
385
204–1636
The iodine content of food varies with geographic location because there is a large
variation in the iodine content of the inorganic world (Table 36) (4). Thus, the average iodine
content of foods shown in Table 35 can not be used universally for estimating iodine intake.
Recommended intake
The daily intake of iodine recommended by the National Research Council of the US National
Academy of Sciences in 1989 was 40 µg/day for young infants (0–6 months), 50 µg/day for
older infants (6–12 months), 60–100 µg/day for children (1–10 years), and 150 µg/day for
adolescents and adults (5). These values approximate 7.5 µg/kg/day for age 0–12 months, 5.4
µg/kg/day for age 1–10 years, and 2 µg/kg/day for adolescents and adults. These amounts are
proposed to allow normal T4 production without stressing the thyroid iodide trapping
mechanism or raising TSH levels.
Iodine requirements in infancy
The US recommendation of 40 µg/day for infants aged 0–6 months (or 8 µg/kg/day, 7 µg/100
kcal, or 50 µg/l milk) is probably derived from the observation that until the late 1960s the
iodine content of human milk was approximately 50 µg/l and from the concept that nutrition
of the human-milk-fed infant growing at a satisfactory rate has been the standard against
which nutrition requirements have been set (6, 7). However, more recent data indicate that the
iodine content of human milk varies markedly as a function of the iodine intake of the
population. For example, it ranges from 20 to 330 µg/l in Europe and from 30 to 490 µg/l in
the United States (6, 8). It is as low as 12 µg/l under conditions of severe iodine deficiency (6,
8). An average human-milk intake of 750 ml/day would give an intake of iodine of about 60
Mean
Range
Mean
Range
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
185
µg/day in Europe and 120 µg/day in the United States. The upper US value (490 µg/l) would
provide 368 µg/day or 68 µg/kg/day for a 5-kg infant. Positive iodine balance in the young
infant, which is required for the increasing iodine stores of the thyroid, is achieved only when
the iodine intake is at least 15 µg/kg/day in full-term infants and 30 µg/kg/day in pre-term
infants (9). The iodine requirement of pre-term infants is twice that of term infants because of
a 50 percent lower retention of iodine by pre-term infants. This corresponds approximately to
an iodine intake of 90 µg/day. (This is probably based on the assumption of average body
weight of 6 kg for a child of 6 months, the mid-age of an infant.) This value is twofold higher
than the US recommendations.
On the basis of these considerations, a revision is proposed for the earlier World
Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and International
Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders (ICCIDD) recommendations (10): an
iodine intake of 90 µg/day from birth onwards is suggested. To reach this objective, and based
on an intake of milk of about 150 ml/kg/day, the iodine content of formula milk should be
increased from 50 to 100 µg/l for full-term infants and to 200 µg/l for pre-term infants.
For a urine volume of about 4–6 dl/day from 0 to 3 years, the urinary concentration of
iodine indicating iodine repletion should be in the range of 150–220 µg/l (1.18-1.73µmol/l) in
infants aged 0–36 months. Such values have been observed in iodine-replete infants in Europe
(11), Canada (12), and the United States (12). Under conditions of moderate iodine
deficiency, as seen in Belgium, the average urinary iodine concentration is only 50–100 µg/l
(0.39-0.79µmol/l) in this age group. It reaches a stable normal value of 180–220 µg/l (1.41-
1.73µmol/l) only after several months of daily iodine supplementation with a physiologic
dose of 90 µg/day (Figure 21).
Table 36
Iodine content of the inorganic world
Location
Iodine content
Terrestrial air
1.0 µg/l
Marine air
100.0 µg/l
Terrestrial water
5.0 µg/l
Sea water
50.0 µg/l
Igneous rocks
500.0 µg/kg
Soils from igneous rocks
9000.0 µg/kg
Sedimentary rocks
1500.0 µg/kg
Soils from sedimentary rocks
4000.0 µg/kg
Metamorphic rocks
1600.0 µg/kg
Soils from the metamorphic rocks
5000.0 µg/kg
186
Chapter 12: Iodine
Figure 21
Changes over time for the median urinary concentration of iodine in 
healthy Belgian infants aged 6–36 months and supplemented with iodine
Each point represents 32–176 iodine determinations (13).
When the urinary iodine concentration in neonates and young infants is below a
threshold of 50-60 µg/l (0.39-0.47µmol/l), corresponding to an intake of 25–35 µg/day, there
is a sudden increase in the prevalence of neonatal serum TSH values in excess of 50 mU/ml,
indicating sub-clinical hypothyroidism and eventually complicated by transient neonatal
hypothyroidism (14). When the urinary iodine concentration is in the range of 10–20 µg/l
(0.08-0.16µmol/l), as observed in severe endemic goitre regions, up to 10 percent of the
neonates have overt severe hypothyroidism, with serum TSH levels above 100 mU/mL and
serum T3 values below 30 µg/l (39 nmol/L) (14). Untreated, these infants progress to
myxedematous endemic cretinism (15).
Thus, the iodine requirement of the young infant approximates 15 µg/kg/day (30
µg/kg/day in pre-term infants). Hyperthyrotropinemia (high levels of serum TSH), indicating
sub-clinical hypothyroidism with the risk of brain damage, occurs when the iodine intake is
about one-third of this value, and dramatic neonatal hypothyroidism resulting in endemic
cretinism occurs when the intake is about one-tenth of this value.
at 90 µg/kg/day for 44 weeks
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
187
Iodine requirements in children
The daily iodine need on a body weight basis decreases progressively with age. A study by
Tovar and colleagues (16) correlating 24-hour thyroid radioiodine uptake and urinary iodine
excretion in 9–13-year-old schoolchildren in rural Mexico suggested that an iodine intake in
excess of 60 µg/day is associated with a 24-hour thyroidal radioiodine uptake below 30
percent. Lower excretion values are associated with higher uptake values. This would
approximate 3 µg/kg/day in an average size 10-year-old child (approximate body weight of 20
kg), so that an intake of 60–100 µg/day for child of 1–10 years seems appropriate. These
requirements are based on the body weight of Mexican children who participated in this
study. The average body weight of a 10-year-old child, as per the Food and Agriculture
Organization references, is 25 kg. Thus, the iodine requirement for a 1–10-year-old child
would be 90–120 µg/day.
Iodine requirements in adults
Iodine at 150 µg/day for adolescents and adults is justified by the fact that it corresponds to
the daily urinary excretion of iodine and to the iodine content of food in non-endemic areas
(areas where iodine intake is adequate) (5). It also provides the iodine intake necessary to
maintain the plasma iodide level above the critical limit of 0.10 µg/dl, which is the average
level likely to be associated with the onset of goitre (17). Moreover, this level of iodine intake
is required to maintain the iodine stores of the thyroid above the critical threshold of 10 mg,
below which an insufficient level of iodisation of thyroglobulin leads to disorders in thyroid
hormone synthesis (18).
Data reflecting either iodine balance or its effect on thyroid physiology can help to
define optimal iodine intake. In adults and adolescents in equilibrium with their nutritional
environment, most dietary iodine eventually appears in the urine, so the urinary iodine
concentration is a useful measure for assessing iodine intake. For this, casual samples are
sufficient if enough are collected and if they accurately represent a community (19). A urinary
iodine concentration of 100 µg/L corresponds to an intake of about 150 µg/day in the adult.
Median urinary iodine concentrations below 100 µg/l in a population are associated with
increases in median thyroid size and in serum TSH and thyroglobulin values. Correction of
the iodine deficiency will bring all these measures back into the normal range. Recent data
from the Thyro-Mobil project in Europe have confirmed these relations by showing that the
largest thyroid sizes are associated with the lowest urinary iodine concentrations (20). Once a
median urinary iodine excretion of about 100 µg/L is reached, the ratio of thyroid size to body
size remains fairly constant. Moulopoulos et al. (21) reported that a urinary iodine excretion
between 151 and 200 µg/g creatinine (1.18-1.57 µmol/g creatinine), corresponding to a
concentration of about 200 µg/l (1.57 µmol/l), gave the lowest values for serum TSH in a
non-goitrous population. Similar recent data from Australia show that the lowest serum TSH
and thyroglobulin values were associated with urine containing 200–300 µg iodine/g
creatinine (1.57-2.36µmol/g creatinine) (22).
Other investigations followed serum TSH levels in subjects without thyroid glands
who were given graded doses of T4 and found that euthyroidism established in adults with an
average daily dose of 100 µg T4 would require at least 65 µg of iodine with maximal
efficiency of iodine use by the thyroid. In practice such maximal efficiency is never obtained
and therefore considerably more iodine is necessary. Data from controlled observations
associated a low urinary iodine concentration with a high goitre prevalence, high radioiodine
uptake, and low thyroidal organic iodine content (23). Each of these measures reached a
steady state once the urinary iodine excretion was 100 µg/l (0.78 µmol/l)or greater.
188
Chapter 12: Iodine
Iodine requirements in pregnancy
The iodine requirement during pregnancy is increased to provide for the needs of the foetus
and to compensate for the increased loss of iodine in the urine resulting from an increased
renal clearance of iodine during pregnancy (24). These requirements have been derived from
studies of thyroid function during pregnancy and in the neonate under conditions of moderate
iodine deficiency. For example, in Belgium, where the iodine intake is estimated to be 50–70
µg/day (25), thyroid function during pregnancy is characterised by a progressive decrease of
the serum concentrations of thyroid hormones and an increase in serum TSH and
thyroglobulin. Thyroid volume progressively increases and is above the upper limit of normal
in 10 percent of the women by the end of pregnancy. Serum TSH and thyroglobulin are still
higher in the neonates than in the mothers (26). These abnormalities are prevented only when
the mother receives a daily iodide supplementation of 161 µg/day during pregnancy (derived
from 131 µg potassium iodide and 100 µg T4 given daily) (27). T4 with iodine was probably
administered to the pregnant women to rapidly correct sub-clinical hypothyroidism, which
would not have occurred if iodine had been administered alone. These data indicate that the
iodine intake required to prevent the onset of sub-clinical hypothyroidism of mother and
foetus during pregnancy, and thus to prevent the possible risk of brain damage of the foetus, is
approximately 200 µg/day.
On the basis of the considerations reviewed above for the respective population groups
to meet the daily iodine requirements, revisions of the current recommendations for daily
iodine intake by WHO, UNICEF, and ICCIDD (10) are proposed; these proposed revisions
are presented in Table  37.
Table 37
Proposed revision for daily iodine intake recommendations of 1996 by
the  World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund, and
International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders
Population sub-groups
Infants ( first 12 months)
90a
15.0
Children (1–6 years)
90
6.0
Schoolchildren ( 7–12 years)
120
4.0
Adults (12+ years)
150
2.0
Pregnant and lactating women
200
3.5
  a Revised to 90 µg from the earlier recommendation of 50 µg.
Upper limit of iodine intake for different age groups
An iodine excess also can be harmful to the thyroid of infants by inhibiting the process of
synthesis and release of thyroid hormones (Wolff-Chaikoff effect) (28). The threshold upper
limit of iodine intake (the intake beyond which thyroid function is inhibited) is not easy to
define because it is affected by the level of iodine intake before exposure to iodine excess.
Indeed, long-standing moderate iodine deficiency is accompanied by an accelerated trapping
of iodide and by a decrease in the iodine stores within the thyroid (18). Under these
conditions, the critical ratio between iodide and total iodine within the thyroid, which is the
starting point of the Wolff-Chaikoff effect, is more easily reached during iodine depletion
Total iodine intake
µg/day
Iodine
µg/kg/day
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
189
than under normal conditions. In addition, the neonatal thyroid is particularly sensitive to the
Wolff-Chaikoff effect because the immature thyroid gland is unable to reduce the uptake of
iodine from the plasma to compensate for increased iodine ingestion (29). For these reasons
transient neonatal hypothyroidism or transient hyperTSHemia after iodine overload of the
mother, especially after the use of povidone iodine, has been reported more frequently in
European countries such as in Belgium, France, and Germany, which have prevailing
moderate iodine deficiency (30-33).
Iodine intake in areas of moderate iodine deficiency
In a study in Belgium, iodine overload of mothers (cutaneous povidone iodine) increased the
milk iodine concentration and increased iodine excretion in the term newborns (mean weight
about 3 kg). Mean milk iodine concentrations of 18 and 128 µg/dl were associated with
average infant urinary iodine excretion levels of 280 and 1840 µg/l (2.20-14.48 µmol/l),
respectively (30). Estimated average iodine intakes would be 112 and 736 µg/day, or 37 and
245 µg/kg/day, respectively. The lower dose significantly increased the peak TSH response to
exogenous thyroid releasing hormone but did not increase the (secretory) area under the TSH
response curve. The larger dose increased both the peak response and secretory area as well as
the baseline TSH concentration. Serum T4 concentrations were not altered, however. Thus,
these infants had a mild and transient, compensated hypothyroid state. Non-contaminated
mothers secreted milk containing 9.5 µg iodine/dl, and the mean urinary iodine concentration
of their infants was 144 µg/l (1.13 µmol/l). These data indicate that modest iodine
overloading of term infants in the neonatal period in an area of relative dietary iodine
deficiency (Belgium) also can impair thyroid hormone formation.
Similarly, studies in France indicated that premature infants exposed to cutaneous
povidone iodine or fluorescinated alcohol-iodine solutions and excreting iodine in urine in
excess of 100 µg/day manifested decreased T4 and increased TSH concentrations in serum
(32). The extent of these changes was more marked in premature infants with less than 34
weeks gestation than in those with 35–37 weeks gestation. The full-term infants were not
affected. These studies suggest that in Europe the upper limit of iodine intake, which
predisposes to blockage of thyroid secretion in premature infants (about 200 µg/day) is 2 to 3
times the average intake from human milk and about equivalent to the upper range of intake.
Iodine intake in areas of iodine sufficiency
Similar studies have not been conducted in the United States, where transient hypothyroidism
is rarely seen perhaps because iodine intake is much higher. For example, urinary
concentrations of 50 µg/dl and above in neonates, which can correspond to a Wolff-Chaikoff
effect in Europe, are frequently seen in healthy neonates in North America (11, 12).
The average iodine intake of infants in the United States in 1978, including infants fed
whole cow milk, was estimated by the market-basket approach (34) to be 576 µg/day
(standard deviation [SD] 196); that of toddlers was 728 µg/day (SD 315) and of adults was
952 µg/day (SD 589). The upper range for infants (968 µg/day) would provide a daily intake
of 138 µg/kg for a 7-kg infant, and the upper range for toddlers (1358 µg/day) would provide
a daily intake of 90 µg/kg for a 15-kg toddler.
Table 38 summarises the recommended dietary intake of iodine for age and
approximate level of intake which appear not to impair thyroid function in the European
studies of Delange in infants, in the loading studies of adults in the United States, or during
ingestion of the highest estimates of dietary intake (just reviewed) in the United States (34).
Except for the values for premature infants, these probably safe limits are 15–20 times more
than the recommended intakes. These data refer to all sources of iodine intake. The average
iodine content of infant formulas is approximately 5 µg/dl. The upper limit probably should
190
Chapter 12: Iodine
be one that provides a daily iodine intake of no more than 100 µg/kg. For this limit and with
the assumption that the total intake is from infant formula, with a daily intake of 150 ml/kg
(100 kcal/kg), the upper limit of the iodine content of infant formula would be about 65 µg/dl.
The current suggested upper limit of iodine in infant formulas of 75 µg/100 kcal (89µg/500 kJ
or 50 µg/dl), therefore, seems reasonable.
Table 38
Recommended dietary intakes of iodine and probable safe upper limits
Group
Premature infants
30
100
Infants 0–6 months
15
150
Infants 7–12 months
15
140
Children 1–6 years
6
50
School children 7–12 years
4
50
Adolescents and adults (12+ years)
2
30
Pregnancy and lactation
3.5
40
a Probably safe.
Excess iodine intake
Excess iodine intake is more difficult to define. Many people regularly ingest huge amounts
of iodine – in the range 10–200 mg/day – without apparent adverse effects. Common sources
are medicines (e.g., amiodarone contains 75 mg iodine per 200-mg capsule), foods
(particularly dairy products), kelp (eaten in large amounts in Japan), and iodine-containing
dyes (for radiologic procedures). Excess consumption of salt has never been documented to
be responsible for excess iodine intake. Occasionally each of these may have significant
thyroid effects, but generally they are tolerated without difficulty. Braverman et al. (35)
showed that people without evidence of underlying thyroid disease almost always remain
euthyroid in the face of large amounts of excess iodine and escape the acute inhibitory effects
of excess intra-thyroidal iodide on the organification (i.e., attachment of `oxidized iodine'
species to throsyl residues in the thyroid gland for the synthesis of thyroid hormones) of
iodide and on subsequent hormone synthesis (escape from or adaptation to the acute Wolff-
Chaikoff effect). This adaptation most likely involves a decrease in thyroid iodide trapping,
perhaps corresponding to a decrease in the thyroid sodium-iodide transporter recently cloned
(36). Some people, especially those with long-standing nodular goitre who live in iodine-
deficient regions and are generally ages 40 years or older, may develop iodine-induced
hyperthyroidism after ingestion of excess iodine in a short period of time.
Iodine fortification
Iodine deficiency is present in almost all parts of the developed and developing world, and
environmental iodine deficiency is the main cause of iodine deficiency disorders. Iodine is
irregularly distributed over the earth’s crust, resulting in acute deficiencies in areas such as
mountainous regions and flood plains. The problem is aggravated by accelerated deforestation
Recommended
µg/kg/day
Upper limita
µg/kg/day
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
191
and soil erosion. Thus, the food grown in iodine-deficient regions can never provide enough
iodine for the people and livestock living there. The iodine deficiency results from geologic
rather than social and economic conditions. It cannot be eliminated by changing dietary habits
or by eating specific kinds of foods but must be corrected by supplying iodine from external
sources. It has, therefore, been a common practice to use common salt as a vehicle for iodine
fortification for the past 75 years. Salt is consumed at approximately the same level
throughout the year by the entire population of a region. Universal salt iodisation is now a
widely accepted strategy for preventing and correcting iodine deficiency disorders.
There are areas where consumption of goitrogens in the staple diet (e.g., cassava)
affects the proper utilisation of iodine by the thyroid gland. For example, in Congo, Africa, as
a result of cassava diets there is an overload of thiocyanate (37). To overcome this problem,
appropriate increases in salt iodisation are required to ensure the recommended dietary intake.
The iodisation of salt is done either by spraying potassium iodate or potassium iodide in
amounts that ensure a minimum of 150 µg iodine/day. Both of these forms of iodine are
absorbed as iodide ions and are completely bio-available. Other methods of iodine
prophylaxis are also used: iodised oil (capsule and injections), iodised water, iodised bread,
iodised soya sauce, iodoform compounds used in dairy and poultry, and certain food additives
(38).
Iodine loss occurs as a result of improper packaging, Humidity and moisture, and
transport in open trucks and railway wagons exposed to sunlight. To compensate for these
losses, higher levels of iodine are used during the production of iodised salt. Losses during the
cooking process vary from 20 percent to 40 percent depending on the type of cooking used
(39).
To ensure the consumption of recommended levels of iodine, the iodine content of salt
at the production level should be monitored with proper quality assurance programmes.
Regular evaluation of the urinary iodine excretion pattern in the population consuming
iodised salt or exposed to other iodine prophylactic measures would help the adjusting of
iodine intake (40).
Recommendations 
Recommendations for future research:
• elaborate the role of T4 in brain development at the molecular level;
• investigate the relation between selenium and iodine deficiency, which has been reported
in certain areas of Africa; and
• investigate the possible interference of infections and other systemic illnesses with iodine
or thyroid hormone use (such interference has not been reported on a population basis).
Recommendations for future actions:
• establish quality assurance procedures at iodised salt production sites;
• track the progress of iodine deficiency disease elimination through the implementation of
cyclic monitoring, which involves division of the country into five zones and carrying out
the assessment in one zone each year; and
• develop and validate quantitative testing kits for iodised salt.
192
Chapter 12: Iodine
1. Stanbury, J.B. 1950. Physiology of endemic goitre. In: Endemic Goitre. p. 261-262.
Geneva. World Health Organization.
2. Hetzel, B.S. 1983. Iodine deficiency disorders (IDD) and their eradication. Lancet, 2:
1126-1129.
3. Dunn, J.T. The use of iodised oil and other alternatives for the elimination of iodine
deficiency disorders. In : Hetzel B.S., Pandav C.S. (eds). SOS for a Billion. The conquest
of iodine deficiency disorders. p. 119-128. New Delhi. Oxford University Press.
4. Koutras, D.A., Matovinovic, J. & Vought, R. 1985. The ecology of iodine. In: Stanbury
J.B., Hetzel B.S. (eds). Endemic goitre and cretinism, iodine nutrition in health and
disease. p. 185-95.New York: Wiley Eastern Limited. 
5. US National Research Council. 1989. Recommended dietary allowances. 10th edition.
Iodine Food and Nutrition Board. P. 213-217. Washington D.C., National Academy Press
Publication.
6. Delange, F., Bourdoux, P., Chanoine, J.P. & Ermans, A.M. 1988. Physiopathology of
iodine nutrition during pregnancy, lactation and early postnatal life. In: Vitamins and
minerals in pregnancy and lactation. Berger, H., eds., New York, Raven Press, Nestle
Nutrition Workshop Series, 16: 205-13.
7. Gushurst, C.A., Mueller, J.A., Green, J.A. & Sedor, F. 1984. Breast milk iodide:
reassessment in the 1980s. Pediatrics, 73: 354-57.
8. Bruhn, J.A., & Franke, A.A. 1983. Iodine in Human milk. J Daily Sci., 66: 1396-98.
9. Delange, F. 1993. Requirements of iodine in Humans. In: Iodine deficiency in Europe. A
continuing concern. Delange F., Dunn J.T., Glinoer D.eds, p. 5-16. New York, Plenum
Press. 
10. World Health Organization. 1996. Trace elements in Human nutrition and health. p. 49-
71. Geneva: World Health Organization Publication, Geneva. 
11. Delange, F., Heidemann, P., Bourdoux, P., Larsson, A., Vigneri, R., Klett, M.,
Beckers, C. & Stubbe, O. 1986. Regional variations of iodine nutrition and thyroid
function during the neonatal period in Europe. Biol. Neonate, 49: 322-30.
12. Delange, F., Dalhem, A., Bourdoux, P., Lagasse, R., Glinoer, D., Fisher, D.A.,
Walfish, P.G. & Ermans, A.M. 1984. Increased risk of primary hypothyroidism in
preterm infants. Pediatrics, 105: 462-69.
13. Fisher, D.A. & Delange, F.M. 1998. Thyroid hormone and iodine requirements in man
during brain development. In : Iodine in Pregnancy. Stanbury J.B., Delange F., Dunn J.T
and Pandav C.S. eds.  1: 1-33. Delhi, Oxford University Press Publication.
14. Delange, F. 1989. Iodine nutrition and congenital hypothyroidism. In: Research in
congenital hypothyroidism. Delange F., Fisher D.A., Glinoer D., eds. p. 173-85. New
York, Plenum Press Publication. 
15. Delange, F. 1986. Anomalies in physical and intellectual development associated with
severe endemic goitre. In: Towards the eradication of endemic goitre, cretinism and
iodine deficiency. Dunn J.P., Pretell E.A., Daza C.H., Viteri F.E. eds. p. 49-67. Pan
American Health Organization, Washington, D.C., Sc. Publication no. 502. 
16. Tovar, E., Maisterrena, J.A. & Chavez, A. 1969. Iodine nutrition levels of school
children in rural Mexico. In: Endemic Goitre. Stanbury, J.B. ed. p. 411-15. Pan American
Health Organization, Washington, D.C.,  Sc. Publication no. 193.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
193
17. Wayne, E.J., Koutras, D.A. & Alexander, W.D. 1964. Clinical aspects of iodine
metabolism. p. 1-303. Oxford, Blackwell publication. 
18. Delange, F.  1994. The disorders induced by iodine deficiency. Thyroid, 4: 107-28.
19. Bourdoux, P., Thilly C., Delange, C. & Ermans, A.M. 1986. A new look at old
concepts in laboratory evaluation of endemic goitre. In: Towards the eradication of
Endemic Goitre, Cretinism, and Iodine deficiency. Dunn, J.T., Pretell, E.A., Daza, C.H.,
Viteri, F.E. eds. p. 115-128. Pan American Health Organization,Washington D.C.,
Scientific publication no. 502. 
20. Delange, F., Benker, G., Caron, P.H., Eber, O., Ott, W., Peter, F., Podoba, J.,
Simescu, M., Szybinsky, Z., Vertongen, F., Vitti, P., Wiersinga, W. & Zamrazil, V.
1997. Thyroid volume and urinary iodine in European schoolchildren. Standardization of
values for assessment of iodine deficiency. Eur. J. Endocrinol., 136: 180-187.
21. Moulopoulos, D.S., Koutras, D.A., Mantzos, J., Souvatzoglou, A., Piperingos, G.D.,
Karaiskos, K.S., Makriyannis, D., Sfontouris, J. & Moulopoulos, S.D. 1988. The
relation of serum T4 and TSH with the urinary iodine excretion. J. Endocrinol. Invest., 11:
437-439.
22. Buchinger, W., Lorenz-Wawschinek, O., Binter, G., Langsteger, W., Bonelli, R. &
Eber, O. 1996. Relation between serum thyrotropin and thyroglobulin with urinary iodine
excretion. In: The Thyroid and Iodine. Nauman, J., Glinoer, D., Braverman, L.E.,
Hostalek, U. eds. p. 189-190. Stuttgart, Germany, Schattauer. 
23. Delange, F. 1993. Requirements of iodine in Humans. In: Iodine deficiency in Europe. A
continuing concern. Delange, F., Dunn, J.T., Glinoer, D. eds p. 5-13. New York, Plenum
Press. 
24. Aboul-Khair, S.A., Turnbull, A.C. & Hytten, F.E. 1964. The physiological changes in
thyroid function during pregnancy. Clin. Sci., 27: 195-207.
25. Glinoer, D., De Nayer, P., Bourdoux, M., Lemone, M., Robyn, C., Van Steirteghem,
A., Kinthaert, J. & Lejeune, D. 1990. Regulation of maternal thyroid during pregnancy.
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 71: 76-87.
26. Glinoer, D., Delange, F., Laboureur, I., De Nayer, P., Lejeune, B., Kinthaert, J. &
Bourdoux, P. 1992. Maternal and neonatal thyroid function at birth in an area of
marginally low iodine intake. J. Clin.Endocrinol. Metab., 75: 800-05.
27. Glinoer, D., De Nayer, P., Delange, F., Toppet, V., Spehl,M., Grun, J.P., Kinthart, J.
& Lejeune, B. 1995. A randomized trial for the treatment of excessive thyroidal
stimulation in pregnancy: maternal and neonatal effects. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 80:
258-69.
28. Roti, E. & Vagenakis, AG. 1996. Effect of excess iodide : clinical aspects. In:
Braverman L.E., & Utiger R.D. eds. Thyroid. p. 316-327. Philadelphia, JB Lippincott. 
29. Sherwin, J.R. Development of the regulatory mechanisms in the thyroid: failure of iodide
to suppress iodide transport activity. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 169: 458-62.
30. Chanoine, J.P., Boulvain, M., Bourdoux, P., Pardou, A., Van Thi, H.V., Ermans,
A.M. & Delange, F. 1988. Increased recall rate at screening for congenital
hypothyroidism in breast-fed infants born to iodine overloaded mothers. Arch. Dis. Child.,
63: 1207-10. 
31. Chanoine, J.P., Bourdoux, P., Pardou, A. & Delange, F. Iodinated skin disinfectants in
mothers at delivery and impairment of thyroid function in their breast-fed infants. In:
Frontier of thyroidology. Medeiros-Neto, G.A., Gaitan, E. eds. p. 1055-60. New York,
Plenum Press.
194
Chapter 12: Iodine
32. Castaing, H., Fournet, J.P., Leger, F.A., Kiesgen, F., Piette, C., Dupard, M.C. &
Savoie, J.C. 1979. Thyroide du nouveau-ne et surcharge en iode apres la naissance. Arch.
Franc. Pediatr., 36: 356-68.
33. Gruters, A., L'Allemand, D., Heidemann, P.H. & Schurnbrand, P. 1983. Incidence of
iodine contamination in neonatal transient hyperthyrotropinemia. Eur. J. Pediatr., 140:
299-300.
34. Park, Y.K., Harland,, B.F., Vanderveen, J.E., Shank, F.R. & Prosky, L. 1981.
Estimation of dietary iodine intake of Americans in recent years. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 79:
17-24. 
35. Braverman, L.E. 1994. Iodine and the thyroid - 33 years of study. Thyroid,  4: 351-356. 
36. Dai, G., Levy O. & Carraco, N. 1996. Cloning and characterisation of the thyroid iodide
transporter. Nature, 379: 458-460.
37. Benmiloud, M., Bachtarzi, H. & Chaouki, M.B. 1983. Public health and nutritional
aspects of endemic goitre and cretinism in Africa. In: Delange F., Ahluwalia R. (eds)
Cassava toxicity and thyroid. p. 50. Research and Public Health Issues, IDRC, Ottawa. 
38. World Health Organization. 1994. Iodine and health: A statement by WHO.
WHO/NUT/94.4.
39. ICCIDD/MI/UNICEF/WHO. 1995. Salt iodisation for the elimination of iodine
deficiency. 
40. WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD. 1992. Indicators for assessing Iodine Deficiency Disorders and
their control through salt iodisation. Report of a Joint Consultation, World Health
Organization, Geneva. November 1992: Document WHO/NUT/94.6.
Acknowledgments
This paper is based on the extensive review carried out by D.A. Fisher and F. M. Delange which
appeared in the chapter “Thyroid Hormone and Iodine Requirements in Man During Brain
Development” from the book Iodine In Pregnancy, edited by John B. Stanbury, Francois M. Delange,
John T. Dunn, and Chandrakant S. Pandav; Oxford University Publication, New Delhi, May-1998.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
195
The role of iron in human metabolic processes
I
ron has several vital functions in the body. It serves as a carrier of oxygen to the tissues
from the lungs by red blood cell haemoglobin, as a transport medium for electrons within
cells, and as an integrated part of important enzyme systems in various tissues. The
physiology of iron has been extensively reviewed (1-6).
Most of the iron in the body is present in the erythrocytes as haemoglobin, a molecule
composed of four units, each containing one heme group and one protein chain. The structure
of haemoglobin allows it to be fully loaded with oxygen in the lungs and partially unloaded in
the tissues (e.g., in the muscles). The iron-containing oxygen storage protein in the muscles,
myoglobin, is similar in structure to haemoglobin but has only one heme unit and one globin
chain. Several iron-containing enzymes, the cytochromes, also have one heme group and one
globin protein chain. These enzymes act as electron carriers within the cell and their structures
do not permit reversible loading and unloading of oxygen. Their role in the oxidative
metabolism is to transfer energy within the cell and specifically in the mitochondria. Other
key functions for the iron-containing enzymes (e.g., cytochrome P450) include the synthesis
of steroid hormones and bile acids; detoxification of foreign substances in the liver; and signal
controlling in some neurotransmitters, such as the dopamine and serotonin systems in the
brain. Iron is reversibly stored within the liver as ferritin and hemosiderin whereas it is
transported between different compartments in the body by the protein transferrin.
Iron requirements
Basal iron losses
Iron is not actively excreted from the body in urine or in the intestines. Iron is only lost with
cells from the skin and the interior surfaces of the body – intestines, urinary tract, and
airways. The total amount lost is estimated at 14 µg/kg body weight/day (7). In children, it is
probably more correct to relate these losses to body surface. A non-menstruating 55-kg
women loses about 0.8 mg Fe/day and a 70-kg man loses about 1 mg. The range of individual
variation has been estimated to be ±15 percent (8).
Earlier studies suggested that sweat iron losses could be considerable, especially in a
hot, Humid climate. However, new studies which took extensive precautions to avoid the
interference of contamination of iron from the skin during the collection of total body sweat
have shown that these sweat iron losses are negligible (9).
Growth
The newborn term infant has an iron content of about 250–300 mg (75 mg/kg body weight).
During the first 2 months of life, haemoglobin concentration falls because of the improved
oxygen situation in the newborn infant compared with the intrauterine foetus. This leads to a
considerable redistribution of iron from catabolised erythrocytes to iron stores. This iron will
cover the needs of the term infant during the first 4–6 months of life and is why iron
requirements during this period can be provided by human milk, that contains very little iron.
Because of the marked supply of iron to the foetus during the last trimester of pregnancy, the
iron situation is much less favourable in the premature and low-birth-weight infant than in the
Chapter 13
Iron
196 
Chapter 13: Iron
term infant. An extra supply of iron is therefore needed in these infants even during the first 6
months of life.
In the full-term infant, iron requirements will rise markedly after age 4–6 months and
amount to about 0.7–0.9 mg/day during the remaining part of the first year. These
requirements are therefore very high, especially in relation to body size and energy intake
(Table 39) (10).
Table 39
Iron intakes required for growth under the age of 18 years, median basal iron
losses, menstrual losses in women, and total absolute iron requirements
Required Iron
Body
weight
Group
Age
Mean
Median
Median
percentile
(Years)
(kg)
(mg/day)
(mg/day)
(mg/day)
(mg/day)
(mg/day)
(mg/day)
Children
0.5–1
9
0.55
0.17
0.72
0.93
1–3
13.3
0.27
0.19
0.46
0.58
4–6
19.2
0.23
0.27
0.50
0.63
7–10
28.1
0.32
0.39
0.71
0.89
Males
11–14
45
0.55
0.62
1.17
1.46
15–17
64.4
0.60
0.90
1.50
1.88
18+
75
1.05
1.05
1.37
Females
11–14 b
46.1
0.55
0.65
1.20
1.40
11–14
46.1
0.55
0.65
0.48 c
1.90 c
1.68
3.27
15–17
56.4
0.35
0.79
0.48 c
1.90 c
1.62
3.10
18+
62
0.87
0.48 c
1.90 c
1.46
2.94
Post-
menopausal
62
0.87
0.87
1.13
Lactating
62
1.15
1.15
1.50
† Total Absolute Requirements = Requirement for growth + basal losses + menstrual losses (females only)
aBased in part on a 1988 report from Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/World Health
Organizaiton (WHO) (8) and in part on new calculations of the distribution of iron requirements in menstruating
women. Because of the very skewed distribution of iron requirements in these women, dietary iron requirements are
calculated for four levels of dietary iron bio-availability (Table 40).
bNon-menstruating.
cEffect of the normal variation in haemoglobin concentration not included in this figure.
In the first year of life, the full-term infant almost doubles its total iron stores and
triple its body weight. The change in body iron during this period occurs mainly during the
first 6–12 months of life. Between 1 and 6 years of age, the body iron content is again
doubled. The requirements for absorbed iron in infants and children are very high in relation
to their energy requirements. For example, in infants 6–12 months of age, about 1.5 mg of
iron need to be absorbed per 4.184 MJ and about half of this amount is required up to age 4
years.
intakes for
Basal Iron
Growth
losses
Menstrual losses
95th
percentile
Median
Total Absolute
Requirements †
95th
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
197
Table 40
The recommended nutrient intakes for iron
based on varying dietary iron bio-availabilities
Group
Age
(years)
(kg)
(mg/day)
% Dietary Iron Bio-availability
15
12
10
5
Children
0.5–1
9
[6.2]b
[7.7]b
[9.3]b
[18.6]b
1–3
13.3
3.9
4.8
5.8
11.6
4–6
19.2
4.2
5.3
6.3
12.6
7–10
28.1
5.9
7.4
8.9
17.8
Males
11–14
45
9.7
12.2
14.6
29.2
15–17
64.4
12.5
15.7
18.8
37.6
18+
75
9.1
11.4
13.7
27.4
Females
11–14 c
46.1
9.3
11.7
14
28
11–14
46.1
21.8
27.7
32.7
65.4
15–17
56.4
20.7
25.8
31
62
18+
62
19.6
24.5
29.4
58.8
Post-
menopausal
Lactating
62
10
12.5
15
30
   aBased in part on a 1988 report from the FAO/WHO (8) and in part on new calculations of the distribution of
iron requirements in menstruating women. Because of the very skewed distribution of iron requirements in
these women, dietary iron requirements are calculated for four levels of dietary iron bio-availability.
bBio-availability of dietary iron during this period varies greatly.
cNon-menstruating.
In the weaning period, the iron requirements in relation to energy intake are the
highest of the lifespan except for the last trimester of pregnancy, when iron requirements to a
large extent have to be covered from the iron stores of the mother (see section on iron and
pregnancy). The rapidly growing weaning infant has no iron stores and has to rely on dietary
iron. It is possible to meet these high requirements if the diet has a consistently high content
of meat and foods rich in ascorbic acid. In most developed countries today, infant cereal
products are the staple foods for that period of life. Commercial products are regularly
fortified with iron and ascorbic acid, and they are usually given together with fruit juices and
solid foods containing meat, fish, and vegetables. The fortification of cereal products with
iron and ascorbic acid is important in meeting the high dietary needs, especially considering
the importance of an optimal iron nutrition during this phase of brain development.
Iron requirements are also very high in adolescents, particularly during the period of
rapid growth (11). There is a marked individual variation in growth rate and the requirements
may be considerably higher than the calculated mean values given in Table 39. Girls usually
have their growth spurt before menarche, but growth is not finished at that time. Their total
iron requirements are therefore considerable. In boys during puberty there is a marked
increase in haemoglobin mass and concentration, further increasing iron requirements to a
level above the average iron requirements in menstruating women (Figure 22). (The
calculations in Figure 22 are based on references 8 and 12–16.)
Mean
Body
weight
Recommended Nutrient Intakea
62
7.5
9.4
11.3
22.6
198
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
Figure 22
Iron requirements of boys and girls
Menstrual iron losses
Menstrual blood losses are very constant from month to month for an individual but
vary markedly from one woman to another (16).The main part of this variation is genetically
controlled by the content of fibrinolytic activators in the uterine mucosa even in populations
which are geographically widely separated (Burma, Canada, China, Egypt, England, and
Sweden) (17, 18). These findings strongly suggest that the main source of variation in iron
status in different populations is not related to a variation in iron requirements but to a
variation in the absorption of iron from the diets. (This statement disregards infestations with
hookworms and other parasites.) The mean menstrual iron loss, averaged over the entire
menstrual cycle of 28 days, is about 0.56 mg/day. The frequency distribution of physiologic
menstrual blood losses is highly skewed. Adding the average basal iron loss (0.8 mg ) and its
variation allows the distribution of the total iron requirements in adult women to be calculated
as the convolution of the distributions of menstrual and basal iron losses (Figure 23). The
mean daily total iron requirement is 1.36 mg. In 10 percent of women it exceeds 2.27 mg and
in 5 percent it exceeds 2.84 mg (19). In 10 percent of menstruating (still-growing) teenagers,
the corresponding daily total iron requirement exceeds 2.65 mg, and in 5 percent of the girls it
exceeds 3.2 mg/day. The marked skewness of menstrual losses is a great nutritional problem
because personal assessment of the losses is unreliable. This means that women with
physiologic but heavy losses cannot be identified and reached by iron supplementation. The
choice of contraceptive method greatly influences menstrual losses. The methods of
calculating iron requirements in women and their variation were recently re-examined (19).
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
199
Figure 23
Distribution of daily iron requirements in menstruating adult women and
teenagers: the probability of adequacy at different amounts of iron absorbed
Note: Left: basal obligatory losses that amount to 0.8 mg; right: varying menstrual iron losses. This graph
illustrates that growth requirements in teenagers vary considerably at different age and between girls.
In postmenopausal women and in physically active elderly people, the iron
requirements per unit of body weight are the same as in men. When physical activity
decreases as a result of ageing, blood volume and haemoglobin mass also diminish, leading to
a shift of iron from haemoglobin and muscle to iron stores. This implies a reduction of the
daily iron requirements. Iron deficiency in the elderly is therefore seldom of nutritional origin
but is usually caused by pathologic iron losses. The absorbed iron requirements in different
groups are given in Table 39. Dietary iron requirements will be discussed below. The iron
situation during pregnancy and lactation are dealt with separately below.
Iron absorption 
With respect to the mechanism of absorption, there are two kinds of dietary iron: heme iron
and non-heme iron (20). In the human diet the primary sources of heme iron are the
haemoglobin and myoglobin from consumption of meat, poultry, and fish whereas non-heme
iron is obtained from cereals, pulses, legumes, fruits, and vegetables. The average absorption
of heme iron from meat-containing meals is about 25 percent (21) The absorption of heme
iron can vary from about 40 percent during iron deficiency to about 10 percent during iron
repletion (22). Heme iron can be degraded and converted to non-heme iron if foods are
cooked at a high temperature for too long. Calcium (see below) is the only dietary factor that
200
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
negatively influences the absorption of heme iron and does so to the same extent that it
influences non-heme iron (Table 41) (23).
Table 41
Factors influencing dietary iron absorption
HEME IRON ABSORPTION
Iron status of subject
Amount of dietary heme iron, especially as meat
Content of calcium in meal (e.g., milk, cheese)
Food preparation (time, temperature)
NON-HEME IRON ABSORPTION
Iron status of subjects
Amount of potentially available non-heme iron
(adjustment for fortification iron and contamination
iron)
* Balance between enhancing and inhibiting factors
Enhancing factors
Ascorbic acid (e.g., certain fruit juices, fruits,
potatoes, and certain vegetables)
Meat, chicken, fish and other seafood
Fermented vegetables (e.g., sauerkraut), fermented
soy sauces, etc.
Non-heme iron is the main form of dietary iron. The absorption of non-heme iron is
influenced by individual iron status and by several factors in the diet. Dietary factors
influencing iron absorption are outlined in Table 41.  Iron compounds used for the
fortification of foods will only be partially available for absorption. Once iron is dissolved, its
absorption from fortificants and food contaminants is influenced by the same factors as the
iron native to the food substance (24, 25). Iron originating from the soil (e.g., from various
forms of clay) is sometimes present in considerable amounts on the surface of foods as a
contaminant originating from dust on air-dried foods or from water used in irrigation. Even if
the fraction of iron that is available is often small, contamination iron may still be
nutritionally important because of the great amounts present (26, 27).
Reducing substances (i.e., substances that keep iron in the ferrous form) must be
present for iron to be absorbed (28). The presence of meat, poultry, and fish in the diet
enhance iron absorption. Other foods contain factors (ligands) that strongly bind ferrous ions,
that subsequently inhibit absorption. Examples are phytates and certain iron-binding
polyphenols.
Inhibiting factors
Phytates and other inositol phosphates (e.g.,
bran products, bread made from high-
extraction flour, breakfast cereals, oats, rice
[especially unpolished rice], pasta products,
cocoa, nuts, soya beans, and peas)
Iron-binding phenolic compounds (e.g., tea,
coffee, cocoa, certain spices, certain
vegetables, and most red wines)
Calcium (e.g., milk, cheese)
Soy proteins
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
201
Inhibition of iron absorption
Phytates are found in all kinds of grains, seeds, nuts, vegetables, roots (e.g., potatoes), and
fruits. Chemically, phytates are inositol hexaphosphate salts and are a storage form of
phosphates and minerals. Other phosphates have not been shown to inhibit non-heme iron
absorption. In North American and European diets, about 90 percent of phytates originate
from cereals. Phytates strongly inhibit iron absorption in a dose-dependent fashion and even
small amounts of phytates have a marked effect (29, 30).
Bran has a high content of phytate and strongly inhibits iron absorption. Whole-wheat
flour, therefore, has a much higher content of phytates than does white wheat flour (31). In
bread some of the phytates in bran are degraded during the fermentation of the dough.
Fermentation for a couple of days (sourdough fermentation) can therefore almost completely
degrade the phytate and increase the bio-availability of iron in bread made from whole-wheat
flour (32). Oats strongly inhibit iron absorption because of their high phytate content, that
results from native phytase in oats being destroyed by the normal heat process used to avoid
rancidity (33). Sufficient amounts of ascorbic acid can counteract this inhibition (34). By
contrast, non-phytate-containing dietary fibre components have almost no influence on iron
absorption.
Almost all plants contain phenolic compounds as part of their defence system against
insects, animals, and humans. Only some of the phenolic compounds (mainly those
containing galloyl groups) seem to be responsible for the inhibition of iron absorption (35).
Tea, coffee, and cocoa are common plant products that contain iron-binding polyphenols (36-
39). Many vegetables, especially green leafy vegetables (e.g., spinach), and herbs and spices
(e.g., oregano) contain appreciable amounts of galloyl groups, that strongly inhibit iron
absorption. Consumption of betel leaves, common in areas of Asia, also has a marked
negative effect on iron absorption.
Calcium, consumed as a salt or in dairy products interferes significantly with the
absorption of both heme and non-heme iron (40-42). Because calcium and iron are both
essential nutrients, calcium cannot be considered to be an inhibitor in the same way as
phytates or phenolic compounds. The practical solution for this competition is to increase iron
intake, increase its bio-availability, or avoid the intake of foods rich in calcium and foods rich
in iron at the same meal (43).
The mechanism of action for absorption inhibition is unknown, but the balance of
evidence strongly suggest that the inhibition is located within the mucosal cell itself at the
common final transfer step for heme and non-heme iron. Recent analyses of the dose-effect
relationship show that no inhibition is seen from the first 40 mg of calcium in a meal. A
sigmoid relationship is then seen, reaching a 60 percent maximal inhibition of iron absorption
by 300–600 mg calcium. The form of this curve suggests a one-site competitive binding of
iron and calcium (Figure 24). This relationship explains some of the seemingly conflicting
results obtained in studies on the interaction between calcium and iron (44).
For unknown reasons, the addition of soy protein to a meal reduces the fraction of iron
absorbed (45-48). This inhibition is not solely explained by the high phytate content of soy
protein. However, because of the high iron content of soy proteins, the net effect on iron
absorption of an addition of soy products to a meal is usually positive. In infant foods
containing soy proteins, the inhibiting effect can be overcome by the addition of sufficient
amounts of ascorbic acid. Some fermented soy sauces, however, have been found to enhance
iron absorption (49, 50).
202
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
Figure 24
Effect of different amounts of calcium on iron absorption
Enhancement of iron absorption
Ascorbic acid is the most potent enhancer of non-heme iron absorption (34, 51-53). Synthetic
vitamin C increases the absorption of iron to the same extent as the native ascorbic acid in
fruits, vegetables, and juices. The effect of ascorbic acid on iron absorption is so marked and
essential that this effect could be considered as one of vitamin C’s physiologic roles (54).
Each meal should preferably contain at least 25 mg of ascorbic acid and possibly more if the
meal contains many inhibitors of iron absorption. Therefore, a requirement of ascorbic acid
for iron absorption should be taken into account when establishing the requirements for
vitamin C, that are set only to prevent vitamin C deficiency (especially scurvy).
Meat, fish, and seafood all promote the absorption of non-heme iron (55-58). The
mechanism for this effect has not been determined. It should be pointed out that meat also
enhances the absorption of heme iron to about the same extent (21). Meat promotes iron
nutrition in two ways: it stimulates the absorption of both heme and non-heme iron and it
provides the well-absorbed heme iron. Epidemiologically, the intake of meat has been found
to be associated with a lower prevalence of iron deficiency.
Organic acids, such as citric acid, have in some studies been found to enhance the
absorption of non-heme iron (29). This effect is not observed as consistently as is the effect of
ascorbic acid (47, 52). Sauerkraut (59) and other fermented vegetables and even some
fermented soy sauces (49, 50) enhance iron absorption. The nature of this enhancement has
not yet been determined.
Iron absorption from meals
The pool concept (see above) in iron absorption implies that there are two main pools in the
gastrointestinal lumen – one pool of heme iron and another pool of non-heme iron – and that
iron absorption takes place independently from these two pools (24). The pool concept also
implies that the absorption of iron from the non-heme iron pool results from all ligands
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
203
present in the mixture of foods included in a meal. The absorption of non-heme iron from a
certain meal not only depends on its iron content but also, and to a marked degree, on the
composition of the meal (i.e., the balance among all factors enhancing and inhibiting the
absorption of iron). The bio-availability can vary more than 10-fold among meals with a
similar content of iron, energy, protein, fat, etc. (20). Just the addition of certain spices (e.g.,
oregano) or a cup of tea may reduce the bio-availability by one-half or more. However, the
addition of certain vegetables or fruits containing ascorbic acid may double or even triple iron
absorption, depending on the other properties of the meal and the amounts of ascorbic acid
present.
Iron absorption from the whole diet
There is limited information about the total amounts of iron absorbed from the diet because no
simple method is available to measure iron absorption from the whole diet. It has been
measured by chemical balance studies using long balance periods or by determining the
haemoglobin regeneration rate in subjects with induced iron deficiency anaemia and a
well-controlled diet over a long period of time.
A method was recently developed to measure iron absorption from the whole diet. In
the first studies all non-heme iron in all meals over periods of 5–10 days was homogeneously
labelled to the same specific activity with an extrinsic inorganic radioiron tracer (43, 60).
Heme iron absorption was then estimated. In a further study, heme and non-heme iron were
separately labelled with two radioiron tracers as biosynthetically labelled haemoglobin and as
an inorganic iron salt (22). New information could be obtained, for example, about the
average bio-availability of dietary iron in different types of diets, overall effects of certain
factors (e.g., calcium) on iron nutrition, and regulation of iron absorption in relation to iron
status. Iron absorption from the whole diet is the sum of the absorption of iron from the single
meals included in the diet. It has been suggested that the iron absorption of single meals may
exaggerate the absorption of iron from the diet (61, 62). Iron absorption from single meals can
never represent iron absorption from the whole diet, but iron absorption from a single meal
was the same when the meal was served in the morning after an overnight fast or at lunch or
supper (63). The same observation was made in another study when a hamburger meal was
served in the morning or 2–4 hours after a breakfast (42).
Because energy expenditure and energy intake set the limit for the amount of food
eaten and for meal size, it is practical to relate the bio-availability of iron in different meals to
energy content (bio-available nutrient density). The use of bio-available nutrient density is a
feasible way to compare different meals, construct menus, and calculate recommended intakes
(64).
Intake of energy and essential nutrients such as iron was probably considerably higher
for early humans than it is today (65-67). The present low iron intake associated with a
low-energy lifestyle implies that the interaction between different factors influencing iron
absorption, will be more critical. For example, the interaction between calcium and iron
absorption probably had no importance in the nutrition of early humans, who had a diet with
ample amounts of both iron and calcium.
Iron balance and regulation of iron absorption 
The body has three unique mechanisms for maintaining iron balance and preventing iron
deficiency and iron overload. The first is the continuous re-utilisation of iron from catabolised
erythrocytes in the body. When an erythrocyte dies after about 120 days, it is usually
degraded by the macrophages of the reticular endothelium. The iron is released and delivered
to transferrin in the plasma, which brings the iron back to red blood cell precursors in the
204
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
bone marrow or to other cells in different tissues. Uptake and distribution of iron in the body
is regulated by the synthesis of transferrin receptors on the cell surface. This system for
internal iron transport not only controls the rate of flow of iron to different tissues according
to their needs but also effectively prevents the appearance of free iron and the formation of
free radicals in the circulation.
The second mechanism is the access of the specific storage protein, ferritin, which can
store and release iron to meet excessive iron demands. This iron reservoir is especially
important in the third trimester of pregnancy.
The third mechanism involves the regulation of absorption of iron from the intestines,
with an increased iron absorption in the presence of decreasing body iron stores and a
decreased iron absorption when iron stores increase. Iron absorption decreases until an
equilibrium is established between absorption and requirements. For a given diet this
regulation of iron absorption, however, can only balance losses up to a certain critical point
beyond which iron deficiency will develop (68). About half of the basal iron losses are from
blood, primarily in the gastrointestinal tract. Both these losses and the menstrual iron losses
are influenced by the haemoglobin level; during the development of an iron deficiency,
menstrual and basal iron losses will successively decrease when the haemoglobin level
decreases. In a state of more severe iron deficiency, skin iron losses may also decrease. Iron
balance (absorption equals losses) may be present not only in normal subjects but also during
iron deficiency and iron overload.
The three main factors that affect iron balance are absorption (intake and
bio-availability of iron), losses, and amount in stores. The interrelationship among these
factors was recently been described in mathematical terms, making it possible to predict, for
example, the amount of stored iron when iron losses and bio-availability of dietary iron are
known (69). With increasing iron requirements or decreasing bio-availability, the regulatory
capacity to prevent iron deficiency is limited (68). However, to prevent iron overload with
increasing dietary iron intake or bio-availability, the regulatory capacity seems to be
extremely good (69).
Iron deficiency
Populations at risk for iron deficiency
Worldwide, the highest prevalence of iron deficiency is found in infants, children,
adolescents, and women of childbearing age, especially pregnant women. The weaning period
in infants is especially critical because of the very high iron requirements in relation to energy
requirements. Thanks to better information and access to fortified cereals for infants and
children, the iron situation has markedly improved in these groups in most industrialized
countries where the highest prevalences of iron deficiency today are observed in menstruating
and pregnant women and adolescents of both sexes. In developing countries, however, the
iron situation is very critical in many groups, especially in the weaning period. Iron nutrition
is of great importance for the adequate development of the brain and other tissues such as
muscles, which are finally differentiated early in life.
Iron deficiency and iron deficiency anaemia are often incorrectly used as synonyms. A
definition of these terms may clarify some confusion about different prevalence figures given
in the literature (70). The cause of the problem is the very wide distribution of the
haemoglobin concentration in healthy, fully iron-replete subjects (in women, 120–160 g/l; in
men, 140–180g/l [71]). During the development of a negative iron balance in subjects with no
mobilisable iron from iron stores (no visible iron in technically perfect bone marrow smears
or a serum ferritin concentration <15 µg/l), there will be an immediate impairment in the
production of haemoglobin with a resulting decrease in haemoglobin and different erythrocyte
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
205
indexes (e.g., mean corpuscular haemoglobin and mean corpuscular volume). In turn this will
lead to an overlap of the distributions of haemoglobin in iron-deficient and iron-replete
women (Figure 25). The extent of overlap depends on the prevalence and severity of iron
deficiency. In populations with more severe iron deficiency, for example, the overlap is much
less marked.
Figure 25
Distribution of haemoglobin concentration in a sample of 38-year-old women
with and without stainable bone marrow iron
Note: The main fraction (91 percent) of the iron-deficient women in this sample
had haemoglobin levels above the lowest normal level for the population: 120 g/l
(mean ± 2 SD) (68). The degree of overlap of the two distributions depends on the
severity of anaemia in a population.
In women, anaemia is defined as a haemoglobin <120 g/l. For a woman who has her
normal homeostatic value set at 150 g/l, haemoglobin level must decrease to 119 g/l (by 26
percent) before she is considered to be anaemic, whereas for a woman who has her normal
haemoglobin set at 121 g/l, haemoglobin level must only decrease by 1.5 percent to 119 g/l.
Iron deficiency anaemia is a rather imprecise concept for evaluating the single subject and has
no immediate physiologic meaning. By definition, this implies that the prevalence of iron
deficiency anaemia is less frequent than iron deficiency and that the presence of anaemia in a
subject is a statistical rather than a functional concept. The main use of the cut-off value is in
comparisons between population groups (72). In practical work, iron deficiency anaemia
should be replaced by the functional concept of iron deficiency. Anaemia per se is mainly
important when it becomes so severe that oxygen delivery to tissues is impaired. An iron
deficiency anaemia which develops slowly in otherwise healthy subjects with moderately
heavy work output will not give any symptoms until the haemoglobin level is about 80 g/l or
lower (71). The reason for the continued use of the concept of iron deficiency anaemia is the
ease of determining haemoglobin. Therefore, in clinical practice, knowledge of previous
haemoglobin values in a subject is of great importance for evaluating the diagnosis.
Iron deficiency being defined as an absence of iron stores combined with signs of an
iron-deficient erythropoiesis implies that in a state of iron deficiency there is an insufficient
supply of iron to various tissues. This occurs at a serum ferritin level <15 µg/l. Iron can then
no longer be mobilised from iron stores and insufficient amounts of iron will be delivered to
206
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
transferrin, the circulating transport protein for iron. The binding sites for iron on transferrin
will therefore contain less and less iron. This is usually described as a reduction in transferrin
saturation. When transferrin saturation drops to a certain critical level, erythrocyte precursors,
which continuously need iron for the formation of haemoglobin, will get an insufficient
supply of iron. At the same time, the supply of iron by transferrin to other tissues will also be
impaired. Liver cells will get less iron, more transferrin will be synthesised, and the
concentration of transferrin in plasma will then suddenly increase. Cells with a high turnover
rate are the first ones to be affected (e.g., intestinal mucosal cells with a short life span). The
iron-transferrin complex is bound to transferrin receptors on cell surfaces and the whole
complex is then taken up by special receptors on the surface of various cells and tissues. The
uptake of iron seems to be related both to transferrin saturation and the number of transferrin
receptors on the cell surface (73, 74). There is a marked diurnal variation in the saturation of
transferrin because the turnover rate of iron in plasma is very high. This fact makes it difficult
to evaluate the iron status from single determinations of transferrin saturation.
Indicators of iron deficiency
The absence of iron stores (iron deficiency) can be diagnosed by showing that there is no
stainable iron in the reticuloendothelial cells in bone marrow smears or more easily by a low
concentration of ferritin in serum (≤15 µg/l). Even if an absence of iron stores per se may not
necessarily be associated with any immediate adverse effects, it is a reliable and good indirect
indicator of iron-deficient erythropoiesis and of an increased risk of a compromised supply of
iron to different tissues.
Even before iron stores are completely exhausted, the supply of iron to the erythrocyte
precursors in the bone marrow is compromised, leading to iron-deficient erythropoiesis (70).
A possible explanation is that the rate of release of iron from stores is influenced by the
amount of iron remaining. As mentioned above it can then be assumed that the supply of iron
to other tissues needing iron is also insufficient because the identical transport system is used.
During the development of iron deficiency haemoglobin concentration, transferrin
concentration, 
transferrin 
saturation, 
transferrin 
receptors 
in 
plasma, 
erythrocyte
protoporphyrin, and erythrocyte indexes are changed. All these methods, however, show a
marked overlap between normal and iron-deficient subjects, that makes it impossible to
identify the single subject with mild iron deficiency by using any of these methods. Therefore,
these tests have been used in combination (e.g., for interpreting results from the second
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey in the United States of America [75, 76]).
The diagnostic specificity then increases but the sensitivity decreases, and thus the true
prevalence of iron deficiency is markedly underestimated if multiple diagnostic criteria are
used. By definition in screening for iron deficiency, the more tests that are used the higher is
the diagnostic specificity but the lower is the sensitivity of the procedure. Fortunately, a low
serum ferritin, ≤15µg/l is always associated with an iron-deficient erythropoiesis. The use of
serum ferritin alone as a measure will also underestimate the true prevalence of iron
deficiency but to a lesser degree than when the combined criteria are used.
A diagnosis of iron deficiency anaemia can be suspected if anaemia is present in
subjects who are iron-deficient as described above. Preferably, to fully establish the diagnosis,
the subjects should respond adequately to iron treatment. The pitfalls with this method are the
random variation in haemoglobin concentrations over time and the effect of the regression
towards the mean when a new measurement is made.
The use of serum ferritin has improved the diagnostic accuracy of iron deficiency. It is
the only simple method available to detect early iron deficiency. Its practical value is
somewhat reduced, however, by the fact that serum ferritin is a very sensitive acute-phase
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
207
reactant and may be increased for weeks after a simple infection with fever for a day or two
(77). Several other conditions, such as use of alcohol (78, 79), liver disease, and collagen
diseases, may also increase serum ferritin concentrations. Determination of transferrin
receptors in plasma has also been recommended in the diagnosis of iron deficiency. Its
advantage is that it is not influenced by infections. Its main use is in subjects who are already
anaemic and it is not sensitive for the early diagnosis of iron deficiency. The use of a
combination of determinations of serum ferritin and serum transferrin receptors has also been
suggested (80).
Causes of iron deficiency
Nutritional iron deficiency implies that the diet cannot cover physiologic iron requirements.
Worldwide this is the most common cause of iron deficiency. In many tropical countries,
infestations with hookworms lead to intestinal blood losses that may be considerable. The
severity of the infestations with hookworms varies considerably between subjects and regions.
The average blood loss can be well estimated by egg counts in stools. Usually the diet in these
populations is also limited with respect to iron content and availability.
In clinical practice a diagnosis of iron deficiency must always lead to a search for
pathologic causes of blood loss (e.g., tumours in the gastrointestinal tract or uterus, especially
if uterine bleedings have increased or changed in regularity). Patients with achlorhydria
absorb dietary iron less well (a reduction of about 50 percent) and patients who have
undergone gastric surgery, especially if the surgery was extensive, may eventually develop
iron deficiency because of impaired iron absorption. Gluten enteropathy is another possibility
to consider, especially in young patients.
Prevalence of iron deficiency
Iron deficiency is probably the most frequent nutritional deficiency disorder in the world. A
recent estimate based on World Health Organization (WHO) criteria indicated that around
600-700 million people worldwide have a marked iron deficiency anaemia (81). In
industrialized countries, the prevalence of iron deficiency anaemia is much lower and usually
varies between 2 percent and 8 percent. However, the prevalence of iron deficiency, including
both anaemic and non-anaemic subjects (see definitions above), is much higher. In
industrialized countries, for example, an absence of iron stores or subnormal serum ferritin
values is found in about 20–30 percent of women of fertile age. In adolescent girls the
prevalence is even higher.
It is difficult to determine the prevalence of iron deficiency more exactly because
representative populations for clinical investigation are hard to obtain. Laboratory methods
and techniques for blood sampling need careful standardization. One often neglected source
of error, for example, when materials in different regions or at different times are compared,
is the fact that there are still reagent kits on the market for determining serum ferritin which
are not adequately calibrated at different concentrations against the international WHO
standards. In addition, seasonal variations in infection rates influence the sensitivity and
specificity of most methods used.
Worldwide, the highest prevalence figures for iron deficiency are found in infants,
children, teenagers, and women of childbearing age. Thanks to better information and access
to fortified cereals for infants and children, the iron situation has markedly improved in these
groups in most industrialized countries, where the highest prevalence today is observed in
menstruating women and adolescents of both sexes.
In developing countries, where the prevalence of iron deficiency is very high and the
severity of anaemia is marked, studies on the distribution of haemoglobin in different
208
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
population groups can provide important information as a valuable basis for action
programmes (72). A more detailed analysis of subsamples may then give excellent
information for the planning of more extensive programmes.
Effects of iron deficiency
Studies in animals have clearly shown that iron deficiency has several negative effects on
important functions in the body (3). Physical working capacity in rats has been shown to be
significantly reduced in iron deficiency, that is especially valid for endurance activities (82,
83). This negative effect seems to be less related to the degree of anaemia than to impaired
oxidative metabolism in the muscles with an increased formation of lactic acid, that in turn is
due to a lack of iron-containing enzymes which are rate limiting for the oxidative metabolism
(84).
The relationship between iron deficiency and brain function is of great importance for
the choice of strategy in combating iron deficiency (85-88). Several structures in the brain
have a high iron content of the same magnitude as observed in the liver. Of great importance
is the observation that the lower iron content of the brain in iron-deficient growing rats cannot
be increased by giving iron later on. This fact strongly suggests that the supply of iron to brain
cells takes place during an early phase of brain development and that, as such, early iron
deficiency may lead to irreparable damage to brain cells.
In humans about 10 percent of brain iron is present at birth; at the age of 10 years the
brain has only reached half its normal iron content, and optimal amounts are first reached at
the age of 20-30 years.
In populations with long-standing iron deficiency, a reduction of physical working
capacity has been demonstrated by several groups with improvement in working capacity
after iron administration (84).
Iron deficiency also negatively influences the normal defence systems against
infections. The cell-mediated immunologic response by the action of T lymphocytes is
impaired as a result of a reduced formation of these cells. This in turn is due to a reduced
DNA synthesis depending on the function of ribonucleotide reductase, which requires a
continuous supply of iron for its function. The phagocytosis and killing of bacteria by the
neutrophil leukocytes is an important component of the defence mechanism against
infections. These functions are impaired in iron deficiency. The killing function is based on
the formation of free hydroxyl radicals within the leukocytes, the respiratory burst, and results
from the activation of the iron-sulphur enzyme NADPH oxidase and probably also
cytochrome b (a heme enzyme) (89).
The impairment of the immunologic defence against infections that was found in
animals is also regularly found in humans. Administration of iron normalises these changes
within 4–7 days. It has been difficult to demonstrate, however, that the prevalence of
infections is higher or that their severity is more marked in iron-deficient subjects than in
control subjects. This may well be ascribed to the difficulty in studying this problem with an
adequate experimental design.
A relationship between iron deficiency and behaviour such as attention, memory, and
learning, has been demonstrated in infants and small children by several groups. In the most
recent well-controlled studies, no effect was noted from the administration of iron. This
finding is consistent with the observations in animals. Therapy-resistant behavioural
impairment and the fact that there is an accumulation of iron during the whole period of brain
growth should be considered strong arguments for the more active and effective combating of
iron deficiency. This is valid for women, especially during pregnancy, for infants and
children, and up through the period of adolescence and early adulthood. In a recent well-
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
209
controlled study, administration of iron to non-anaemic but iron-deficient adolescent girls
improved verbal learning and memory (90).
Well-controlled studies in adolescent girls show that iron-deficiency without anaemia
is associated with reduced physical endurance (91) and changes in mood and ability to
concentrate (92). A recent careful study showed that there was a reduction in maximum
oxygen consumption in non-anaemic women with iron deficiency that was unrelated to a
decreased oxygen-transport capacity of the blood (93).
Iron during pregnancy and lactation
Iron requirements during pregnancy are well established (Table 42). Most of the iron required
during pregnancy is used to increase the haemoglobin mass of the mother, which occurs in all
healthy pregnant women who have sufficiently large iron stores or who are adequately
supplemented with iron. The increased haemoglobin mass is directly proportional to the
increased need for oxygen transport during pregnancy and is one of the important physiologic
adaptations that occurs in pregnancy (94, 95). A major problem for iron balance in pregnancy
is that iron requirements are not equally distributed over its duration. The exponential growth
of the foetus implies that iron needs are almost negligible in the first trimester and that more
than 80 percent relates to the last trimester. The total daily iron requirements, including the
basal iron losses (0.8 mg ), increase during pregnancy from 0.8 mg to about 10 mg during the
last 6 weeks of pregnancy.
Iron absorption during pregnancy is determined by the amount of iron in the diet, its
bio-availability (meal composition), and the changes in iron absorption that occur during
pregnancy. There are marked changes in the fraction of iron absorbed during pregnancy. In
the first trimester there is a marked, somewhat paradoxical, decrease in the absorption of iron,
which is closely related to the reduction in iron requirements during this period as compared
with the non-pregnant state (see below). In the second trimester iron absorption is increased
by about 50 percent, and in the last trimester it may increase by up to about four times. Even
considering the marked increase in iron absorption, it is impossible for the mother to cover
her iron requirements from diet alone, even if its iron content and bio-availability are very
high. It can be calculated that with diets prevailing in most industrialized countries, there will
be a deficit of about 400–500 mg in the amount of iron absorbed during pregnancy
(Figure 26).
An adequate iron balance can be achieved if iron stores of 500 mg are available.
However, it is uncommon for women today to have iron stores of this size. It is therefore
recommended that iron supplements in tablet form, preferably together with folic acid, be
given to all pregnant women because of the difficulties in correctly evaluating iron status in
pregnancy with routine laboratory methods. In the non-anaemic pregnant woman, daily
supplements of 100 mg of iron (e.g., as ferrous sulphate) given during the second half of
pregnancy are adequate. In anaemic women higher doses are usually required.
210
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
Table 42
Iron requirements during pregnancy
(mg)
IRON REQUIREMENTS DURING PREGNANCY
Foetus
Placenta
Expansion of maternal erythrocyte mass
Basal iron losses
Total iron requirement
NET IRON BALANCE AFTER DELIVERY
Contraction of maternal erythrocyte mass
Maternal blood loss
Net iron balance
Net iron requirements for pregnancy if sufficient maternal
iron stores are present (1040 - 200 = 840)
During the birth process, the average blood loss corresponds to about 250 mg iron. At
the same time, however, the haemoglobin mass of the mother is gradually normalised, which
implies that about 200 mg iron from the expanded haemoglobin mass (150–250 mg) is
returned to the mother. To cover the needs of a woman after pregnancy, a further 300 mg of
iron must be accumulated in the iron stores in order for the woman to start her next pregnancy
with about 500 mg of stored iron. Such a restitution is not possible with present types of diets.
There is an association between low haemoglobin values and prematurity. An
extensive study (96) showed that a woman with a hematocrit of 37 percent had twice the risk
of having a premature birth as did a woman with a hematocrit between 41 percent and 44
percent (P≤0.01). A similar observation was reported in another extensive study in the United
States of America (97). These materials were examined retrospectively and the cause of the
lower hematocrit was not examined.
In lactating women, the daily iron loss in milk is about 0.3 mg. Together with the
basal iron losses of 0.8 mg, the total iron requirements during the lactation period amount to
1.1 mg/day.
Early in pregnancy there are marked hormonal, haemodynamic, and haematologic
changes. There is, for example, a very early increase in the plasma volume, which has been
used to explain the physiologic anaemia of pregnancy observed also in iron-replete women.
The primary cause of this phenomenon, however, is more probably an increased ability of the
haemoglobin to deliver oxygen to the tissues (foetus). This change is induced early in
pregnancy by increasing the content of 2, 3-diphospho-D-glycerate in the erythrocytes, which
shifts the hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve to the right. The anaemia is a consequence of
Iron requirements
300
50
450
240
1040
+450
-250
+200
840
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
211
this important adaptation and is not primarily a desirable change, for example, to improve
placental blood flow by reducing blood viscosity.
Figure 26
Daily iron requirements and daily dietary iron absorption in pregnancy
Note: The hatched area represents the deficit of iron that has to be covered by iron from stores or iron
supplementation.
Another observation has likewise caused some confusion about the rationale of giving
extra iron routinely in pregnancy. In extensive studies of pregnant women, there is a U-shaped
relationship between various pregnancy complications and the haemoglobin level (i.e., there
are more complications at both low and high levels). There is nothing to indicate, however,
that high haemoglobin levels (within the normal non-pregnant range) per se have any negative
effects. The haemoglobin increase is caused by pathologic hormonal and hemodynamic
changes induced by an increased sensitivity to angiotensin II that occurs in some pregnant
women, leading to a reduction in plasma volume, hypertension, and toxaemia of pregnancy.
Pregnancy in adolescents presents a special problem because  iron is needed to cover
the requirements of growth. In countries with very early marriage, a girl may get pregnant
before menstruating. The additional iron requirements for growth of the mother are then very
high and the iron situation is very serious.
In summary, the marked physiologic adjustments occurring in pregnancy are not
sufficient to balance its very marked iron requirements, and the pregnant woman has to rely
on her iron stores, if present. The composition of the diet has not been adjusted to the present
low-energy-demanding lifestyle in industrialized countries. This is probably the main cause of
the critical iron-balance situation in pregnancy today, that is due to absent or insufficient iron
stores in women before they get pregnant. The unnatural necessity to give extra nutrients such
as iron and folate to otherwise healthy pregnant women should be considered in this
perspective.
212
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
Iron supplementation and fortification
The prevention of iron deficiency has become even more urgent in recent years with the
accumulation of evidence strongly suggesting a relationship between even mild iron
deficiency and brain development and especially with the observation that functional defects
affecting learning and behaviour cannot be reversed by giving iron later on. As mentioned,
iron deficiency is common both in developed and in developing countries. Great efforts have
been made by WHO to develop methods to combat iron deficiency.
Iron deficiency can generally be combated by one or more of the following three
strategies: 1) iron supplementation (i.e., giving iron tablets to certain target groups such as
pregnant women and preschool children); 2) iron fortification of certain foods, such as flour;
and 3) food and nutrition education to improve the amount of iron absorbed from the diet by
increasing the intake of iron and especially by improving the bio-availability of the dietary
iron.
Several factors determine the feasibility and effectiveness of different strategies, such
as the health infrastructure of a society, the economy, access to suitable vehicles for iron
fortification, etc. The solutions are therefore often quite different in developing and developed
countries. There is an urgency to obtain knowledge about the feasibility of different methods
to improve iron nutrition and to apply present knowledge. In addition, initiation of local
activities should be stimulated while actions from governments are awaited.
The evidence for estimating the recommended nutrient intake for iron 
To translate physiologic iron requirements, given in Table 30, into dietary iron requirements,
the bio-availability of iron in different diets must be calculated. It is therefore necessary to
choose an iron status where the supply of iron to the erythrocyte precursors and other tissues
starts to be compromised. A state of iron-deficient erythropoiesis occurs when iron can no
longer be mobilised from iron stores; iron can no longer be mobilised when stores are almost
completely empty. A reduction then occurs, for example, in the concentration of haemoglobin
and in the average content of haemoglobin in the erythrocytes (a reduction in mean
corpuscular haemoglobin). At the same time the concentration of transferrin in the plasma
increases because of an insufficient supply of iron to liver cells. These changes were recently
shown to occur rather suddenly at a level of serum ferritin of ≤15 µg/l (68, 70). A continued
negative iron balance will further reduce the level of haemoglobin. Symptoms related to iron
deficiency are less related to the haemoglobin level and more to the fact that there is a
compromised supply of iron to tissues.
The bio-availability of iron in meals consumed in countries with a Western-type diet
has been measured by using different methods. Numerous single-meal studies have shown
absorption of non-heme iron ranging from 5 percent to 40 percent (59, 98, 99). Attempts have
also been made to estimate the bio-availability of dietary iron in populations consuming
Western-type diets by using indirect methods (e.g., calculation of the coverage of iron
requirements in groups of subjects with known dietary intake). Such estimations suggest that
in borderline iron-deficient subjects the bio-availability from good diets may reach a level
around 14–16 percent (15 percent relates to subjects who have a serum ferritin value of
<15µg/l or a reference dose absorption of 56.5 percent) (19).
Recently, direct measurements were made of the average bio-availability of iron in
different Western-type diets (22, 43, 60). Expressed as total amounts of iron absorbed from
the whole diet, it was found that 53.2 µg Fe/kg/day could be absorbed daily from each of the
two main meals of an experimental diet which included ample amounts of meat or fish. For a
body weight of 55 kg and an iron intake of 14 mg/day, this corresponds to a bio-availability of
21 percent in subjects with no iron stores and an iron-deficient erythropoiesis. A diet common
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
213
among women in Sweden contained smaller portions of meat and fish, higher phytates, and
some vegetarian meals each week was found to have a bio-availability of 12 percent.
Reducing the intake of meat and fish further will reduce the bio-availability to about 10
percent (25µg Fe/kg/day). In vegetarians the bio-availability is usually low because of the
absence of meat and fish and a high intake of phytate and polyphenols. An average good
Western-type whole diet has a bio-availability of about 15 percent but for common diets,
especially among women, the bio-availability is around 12 percent or even 10 percent. In
countries or for certain groups in a population with a very high meat intake, the bio-
availability may rather be around 18 percent. In Western countries, a high bio-availability is
mainly associated with a high meat intake, a high intake of ascorbic acid with meals, a low
intake of phytate-rich cereals, and no coffee or tea within 2 hours of the main meals (38).
Table 43 shows examples of diets with different iron bio-availability.
Table 43
Examples of diet with different iron bio-availability
µg/kg/day
Preagricultural ancestors
Plant/animal subsistence: 65/35 
Very high meat and ascorbic acid
150
Very high meat in 2 main meals daily and high ascorbic acid (theoretical)
75
High meat/fish in 2 main meals daily
66.7
Moderate meat/fish in 2 main meals daily
53.2
Moderate meat/fish in 2 main meals daily, low phytate and calcium
42.3
Meat/fish in 60% of 2 main meals daily, high phytate and calcium
31.4
Lower meat intake, high phytate. Often one main meal.
25
Meat/fish negligible, high phytate. High tannin, low ascorbic acid.
15
Table 44
Translation of bio-availability expressed as amount of iron absorbed
into percent absorbed for two levels of iron intake
Bio-availability,
µg/kg/day
150
8.25
55
48.8
75
4.13
27.5
24.4
66.7
3.67
24.5
21.8
53.2
2.93
19.5
17
42.3
2.32
15.5
13.5
31.4
1.73
11.5
10
25
1.38
9.2
8.2
15
0.83
5.5
4.7
Iron absorption data (Table 44) are also available from several population groups in
Africa (100), South America (101), India, and Southeast Asia. The bio-availability of
different Indian diets after an adjustment to a reference dose absorption of 56.5 percent was
1.7–1.8 percent for millet-based diets, 3.5–4.0 percent for wheat-based diets, and 8.3-10.3
percent for rice-based diets (102). In Southeast Asia, iron absorption data has been reported
from Burma and Thailand. In Burma, iron absorption from a basal rice-based meal was 1.7
Type of diet
Absorption as mg Fe
at no iron stores in
women of 55 kg body weight
%
15 mg
17 mg
Bio-availability
Bio-availability
214
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
percent, when the meal contained 15 g of fish the bio-availability of iron was 5.5 percent, and
with 40 g of fish it was 10.1 percent (103). In Thailand, iron absorption from a basal rice-
based meal was 1.9 percent; adding 100 g of fresh fruit increased absorption to 4.8 percent
and adding 80 g of lean meat increased non-heme iron absorption to 5.4 percent (104, 105). In
three other studies serving basal meals with vegetables rich in ascorbic acid, the absorption
figures were 5.9 percent, 10 percent, and 10.8 percent, respectively (106). In a further study in
Thailand, 60 g of fish were added to the same meal, which increased absorption to 21.6
percent. An even more realistic field study was done in Central Thailand to examine the
reproducibility of dietary iron absorption measurements under optimal field conditions for 20
farmers and labourers (16 men, 4 women). The subjects had a free choice of foods (rice,
vegetables, soup, a curry, and fish). All foods consumed were weighed and the rice was
labelled with an extrinsic radioiron tracer. The mean absorption was 20.3 percent (adjusted to
reference dose absorption of 56.5 percent) (107).
It is obvious that absorbed iron requirements need to be adjusted to different types of
diets, especially in vulnerable groups. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and WHO recommended, for didactic reasons, three bio-availability levels of
5 percent, 10 percent, and 15 percent (8). For developing countries, it may be realistic to use
the figures of 5 percent and 10 percent. In populations consuming more Western-type diets,
two levels would be adequate  – 12 percent and 15 percent – mainly depending on meat
intake.
The amount of dietary iron absorbed is mainly determined by the amount of body
stores of iron and by the properties of the diet (iron content and bio-availability). In anaemic
subjects the rate of erythrocyte production also influences iron absorption. In a 55-kg woman
with average iron losses who consumes a diet with an iron bio-availability of 15 percent, the
mean iron stores would be about 120 mg. Under these circumstances approximately 10–15
percent of women would have no iron stores. When a diet with a bio-availability of 12 percent
is consumed by a 55-kg woman, iron stores would be approximately 75 mg and about 25–30
percent of women would have no iron stores at all. When the bio-availability of iron decreases
to 10 percent, mean iron stores are reduced to about 25 mg and about 40–50 percent of
women consuming this diet would have no iron stores. Those consuming diets with an iron
bio-availability of 5 percent have no iron stores and they are iron deficient. These calculations
are based on a recent study (69).
Recommendations for iron intake for infants, children, younger and older
adults, and pregnant and lactating women
Tables 39 and 40 showed both the physiologic absorbed iron requirements and the dietary
iron requirements. All these figures are for the 95th percentile of iron requirements. The
figures are given for women with a body weight of 55 kg and men with a body weight of 70
kg. For example, women with a body weight of 45 kg and men with a body weight of 55 kg
have iron requirements that are 20 percent lower than those given in Table 39.
No figures are given for dietary iron requirements in pregnant women because the iron
balance in pregnancy depends not only on the properties of the diet but also and especially on
the amounts of stored iron.
Future research
• Acquire knowledge of the content of phytate and iron-binding polyphenols in food,
condiments, and spices. Produce new food tables, which include such data.
• Acquire knowledge about detailed composition of common meals and their usual
variation in composition to examine the feasibility to make realistic recommendations
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
215
about changes in meal composition, taking into consideration the effect of such changes
on other nutrients (e.g., vitamin A).
• Give high priority to systematic research. The very high iron requirements, especially in
relation to energy requirements, in the weaning period make it difficult to develop foods
and give recommendations that are effective and realistic. Alternatives such as home
fortification of weaning foods should also be considered.
• Critically analyse the effectiveness of iron compounds used for fortification.
• Study models for improving iron supplementation, from the distribution of iron tablets to
the increase of motivation to take iron supplements, especially during pregnancy.
216
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
1. Bothwell, T.H. 1979. Iron metabolism in man. London, Blackwell Scientific Publications.
2. Hallberg, L. 1982. Iron absorption and iron deficiency. Hum Nutr:Clin. Nutr.,
36:259-278.
3. Dallman, P.R. 1986. Biochemical basis for the manifestations of iron deficiency. Ann.
Rev. Nutr., 6: 13-40.
4. Brock, J.H., Halliday, J.W., M.J.P. & Powell, L.W. 1994. Iron metabolism in health
and disease, London, W.B. Saunders Company Ltd.
5. Kühn, L.C. 1996. Control of cellular iron transport and storage at the molecular level. In:
Hallberg LA, et al., eds. Iron nutrition in health and disease. p. 17-29. London, John
Libbey & Company. 
6. Mascotti, D.P., Rup, D. & Thach, R.E. 1995. Regulation of iron metabolism:
Translational effects medicated by iron, heme and cytokines. Ann. Rev. Nutr., 15: 239-61.
7. Green, R. 1968. Body iron excretion in man. A colloborative study. Am. J. Med., 45:
336-353.
8. FAO/WHO. 1988.  Requirements of vitamin A, iron, folate and vitamin B12. Report of a
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation.. Rome: FAO. (FAO Food and Nutrition Series No.
23). 
9. Brune, M. 1986. Iron losses in sweat. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 43: 438-443.
10. European Communities. 1993. Nutrient and energy intakes for the European
Community. EG-Report. Brussels Luxembourg: Commission of the European
Communities.
11. Rossander-Hulthén, L. & Hallberg L. 1996. Prevalence of iron deficiency in
adolescents. In: Hallberg L, Asp N-G, eds. Iron nutrition in health and diseas.  p.149-156.
London, John Libby& Co. 
12. Dallman, P.R. & Siimes, M. 1979. Percentile curves for hemoglobin and red cell volume
in infancy and childhood. J. Pediatr., 94: 26-31.
13. Tanner, J.M., Whitehouse, R.H. & Takaishi, M. 1966. Standards from birth to maturity
for height, weight, height velocity, and weight velocity in British children, 1965, Part I.
Arch. Dis. Child., 41: 454-471.
14. Tanner, J.M., Whitehouse, R.H. & Takaishi, M. 1966. Standards from birth to maturity
for height, weight, height velocity, and weight velocity in British children, 1965, Part II. .
Arch Dis. Child., 41: 613-632.
15. Karlberg, P. 1976. The somatic development of children in a Swedish urban community.
Acta. Paediatr. Scand. Supplement, 258: 5-147.
16. Hallberg, L. 1966. Menstrual blood loss - a population study. Variation at different ages
and attempts to define normality. Acta. Obstet. Gynecol. Scand., 45: 320-351.
17. Rybo, G-M. & Hallberg, L. 1966. Influence of heredity and environment on normal
menstrual blood loss. A study of twins. Acta. Obstet. Gynecol. Scand., 45: 389-410.
18. Rybo, G-M. 1966. Plasminogen activators in the endometrium. I. Methodological aspects
and II. Clinical aspects. Acta. Obstet. Gynecol. Scand., 45: 411-450.
19. Hallberg, L. & Rossander-Hulthénm, L. 1991. Iron requirements in menstruating
women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 1047-1058.
20. Hallberg, L. 1981. Bio-availability of dietary iron in man. Ann. Rev. Nutr., 1: 123-147.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
217
21. Hallberg, L. 1979. Dietary heme iron absorption. A discussion of possible mechanisms
for the absorption-promoting effect of meat and for the regulation of iron absorption.
Scand. J. Gastroenterol., 14: 769-779.
22. Hallberg, L., Hulthén, L. & Gramatkovski, E. 1997. Iron absorption from the whole
diet in men: how effective is the regulation of iron absorption? Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 347-
56.
23. Hallberg, L. 1993. Inhibition of haem-iron absorption in man by calcium. Br. J. Nutr.,
69:533-540.
24. Hallberg, L. 1974. The pool concept in food iron absorption and some of its implications.
Proc. Nutr. Soc., 33: 285-291.
25. Hallberg, L. 1985. Factors influencing the efficacy of iron fortification and the selection
of fortification vehicles. In: Clydesdale FM, Wiemer KL, eds. Iron fortification of foods.
p. 17-28. New York: Academic Press Inc. p. 17-28. 
26. Hallberg, L. & Björn-Rasmussen, E. 1981. Measurement of iron absorption from meals
contaminated with iron. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 2808-2815.
27. Hallberg, L. 1983. Iron absorption from some Asian meals containing contamination
iron. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 1983, 37:272-277.
28. Wollenberg, P. & Rummel, W. 1987. Dependence of intestinal iron absorption on the
valency state of iron. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg´s Arch. Pharmacol., 36: 578 - 582.
29. Gillooly, M. 1983. The effect of organic acids, phytates and polyphenols on absorption of
iron from vegetables. Br. J. Nutr., 49: 331-342.
30. Hallberg, L., Brune, M. & Rossander, L. 1989. Iron absorption in man: ascorbic acid
and dose-dependent inhibition by phytate. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 49: 140-144.
31. Hallberg, L., Rossander, L. & Skånberg, A-B. 1987. Phytates and the inhibitory effect
of bran on iron absorption in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 45: 988-996.
32. Brune, M. 1992. Iron absorption from bread in Humans: Inhibiting effects of cereal fiber,
phytate and inositol phosphates with different numbers of phosphate groups. J. Nutr., 122:
442-449.
33. Rossander-Hulthén, L., Gleerup, A. & Hallberg, L. 1990. Inhibitory effect of oat
products on non-haem iron absorption in man. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 44: 783-791.
34. Siegenberg, D. 1991. Ascorbic acid prevents the dose-dependent inhibitory effects of
polyphenols and phytates on nonheme-iron absorption. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 537-41.
35. Brune, M., Rossander, L. & Hallberg, L. 1989. Iron absorption and phenolic
compounds: importance of different phenolic structures. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 43: 547-558.
36. Disler, P.B. 1975. The effect of tea on iron absorption. Gut, 16: 193-200.
37. Derman, D. 1977. Iron absorption from a cereal-based meal containing cane sugar
fortified with ascorbic acid. Br. J. Nutr., 38: 261-269.
38. Morck, T.A., Lynch, S.E. & Cook, J.D. 1983. Inhibition of food iron absorption by
coffee. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37: 416-420.
39. Hallberg, L. & Rossander, L. 1982. Effect of different drinks on the absorption of non-
heme iron from composite meals. Hum. Nutr: Appl. Nutr., 36: 116-123.
40. Hallberg, L. 1991. Calcium: effect of different amounts on nonheme-and heme-iron
absorption in Humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 112-119.
41. Hallberg, L. 1992. Calcium and iron absorption: mechanism of action and nutritional
importance. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 46: 317-327.
218
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
42. Gleerup, A., Rossander-Hultén, L. & Hallberg, L. 1993. Duration of the inhibitory
effect of calcium on non-haem iron absorption in man. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 47: 875-879.
43. Gleerup, A. 1995. Iron absorption from the whole diet: comparison of the effect of two
different distributions of daily calcium intake. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 61: 97-104.
44. Hallberg, L. 1998. Does calcium interfere with iron absorption? Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68:
3-4.
45. Cook, J.D., Morck,T.A. & Lynch, S.R. 1981. The inhibitory effects of soy products on
nonheme iron absorption in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 2622-9.
46. Hallberg, L. & Hultén, L. 1982. Effect of soy protein on nonheme iron absorption in
man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 36: 514-520.
47. Hallberg, L. & Rossander, L. 1984. Improvment of iron nutrition in developing
countries: comparison of adding meat, soy protein, ascorbic acid, citric acid, and ferrous
sulphate on iron absorption from a simple Latin American-type of meal. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 39: 577-583.
48. Hurrell, R.F. 1992.  Soy protein, phytate, and iron absorption in Humans. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 56: 573-578.
49. Baynes, R.D. 1990. The promotive effect of soy sauce on iron absorption in Human
subjects. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 44: 419-24.
50. Macfarlane, B.J. 1990. The effect of traditional oriental soy products on iron absorption.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 51: 873-80.
51. Cook, J.D. & Monsen, E.R. 1977. Vitamin C, the common cold and iron absorption. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 30: 235-241.
52. Hallberg, L., Brune, M. & Rossander, L. 1986. Effect of ascorbic acid on iron
absorption from different types of meals. Studies with ascorbic-acid-rich foods and
synthetic ascorbic acid given in different amounts with different meals. Hum. Nutr: Appl.
Nutr., 40: 97-113.
53. Derman, D.P. 1980. Importance of ascorbic acid in the absorption of iron from infant
foods. Scand. J. Haematol., 25: 193-201. 
54. Hallberg, L., Brune, M. & Rossander-Hultén, L-S. 1987. Is there a physiological role
of vitamin C in iron absorption? Ann. York. Acad. Sci., 498: 324-332.
55. Layrisse, M., Martinez-Torres, C. & Roch, M. 1968. The effect of interaction of
various foods on iron absorption. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 21: 1175-1183.
56. Layrisse, M. 1969. Food iron absorption: A comparison of vegetable and animal foods.
Blood, 33: 430-443.
57. Cook, J.D. & Monsen, E.R. 1976. Food iron absorption in Human subjects. III.
Comparison of the effect of animal proteins on nonheme iron absorption. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 29: 859-867.
58. Björn-Rasmussen, E. & Hallberg, L. 1979. Effect of animal proteins on the absorption
of food iron in man. Nutr. Metab., 23: 192-202.
59. Hallberg, L. & Rossander, L. 1982. Absorption of iron from Western-type lunch and
dinner meals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 35: 502-509.
60. Hulthén, L. 1995. Iron absorption from the whole diet. Relation to meal composition,
iron requirements and iron stores. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 49: 794-808.
61. Hallberg, L. & Hulthén, L. 1996. Methods to study dietary iron absorption in man -. an
overview. In: Hallberg L, Asp N-G, eds. Iron nutrition in health and disease. p. 81-95.
London, John Libbey & Company Ltd.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
219
62. Cook, J.D., Dassenko, S.A. & Lynch, S.R. 1991. Assessment of the role of non heme-
iron availability in iron balance. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 717-722.
63. Taylor, P.G. 1995. Iron bio-availability from diets consumed by different socio-economic
strata of the Venezuelan population. J. Nutr., 25: 1860-1868.
64. Hallberg, L. 1981. Bio-available nutrient density: a new concept applied in the
interpretation of food iron absorption data. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 34: 2242-2247.
65. Eaton, S.B. & Konner, M. 1985. Paleolithic nutrition: A consideration of its nature and
current implications. N. Engl. J. Med., 312: 283-289.
66. Eaton, S.B. & Nelson, D.A. 1991. Calcium in evolutionary perspective. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 54: S-281-287.
67. Eaton, S.B., Eaton, III S.B. & Konner, M. 1997. Paleolithic nutrition revisited: a twelve
year retrospective on its nature and implications. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 51: 207-216.
68. Hallberg, L. 1995. Iron balance in menstruating women. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 49: 200-207.
69. Hallberg L., Hulthén L. & Garby L. 1998. Iron stores in man in relation to diet and iron
requirements. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 52: 623-31.
70. Hallberg, L. 1993. Screening for iron deficiency: an analysis based on bone-marrow
examinations and serum ferritin determinations in a population sample of women. Br. J.
Haematol., 85: 787-798.
71. Wintrobe, M.M. 1981. Clinical Hematology. (Eighth ed.), Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger.
72. Yip, R., Stolzfus, R.J. & W.K.S. 1996. Assessment of the prevalence and the nature of
iron deficiency for populations: the utility of comparing haemoglobin distributions. In:
Hallberg L, Asp, N-G., eds. Iron nutrition in health and disease. London, John Libby &
Company Ltd.
73. Harford, J.B., Röuault, T.A. & Klausner, R.D. 1994. The control of cellular iron
homeostasis. In: Brock JH et al., eds. Iron metabolism in health and disease. p.123-149.
London, W.B.Saunders Company Ltd. 
74. Baker, E. & Morgan, E.H. 1994. Iron transport. In: Brock JH et al., eds. Iron metabolism
in health and disease. p.63-95.  London, W.B. Saunders Company Ltd.
75. Pilch, S.M. & Senti, F.R.E. 1984. Assessment of the iron nutritional status of the US
population based on data collected in the second National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 1976-1980. Prepared for the Food and Drug Administration under
Contract no FDA 223-83-2384. Bethesda, MD, Life Sciences Research Office, Federation
of American Societies for Experimental Biology.
76. Group ESW. 1985. Summary of a report on assessment of the iron nutritional status of
the United States population. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 2: 1318-1330.
77. Hulthén, L. 1998. Effect of a mild infection on serum ferritin concentration -clinical and
epidemiological implications. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 52: 1-4.
78. Osler, M., Minman, N. & Heitman, B.L. 1998. Dietary and non-dietary factors
associated with iron status in a cohort of Danish adults followed for six years. Eur. J. Clin.
Nutr., 52: 459-63.
79. Leggett, B.A. 1990. Factors affecting the concentrations of ferritin in serum in a healthy
Australian population. Clin. Chem., 36: 1350 1555.
80. Cook, J.D., Skikne, B. & Baynes, R. 1996. The use of transferrin receptor for the
assessment of iron status. In: Hallberg LA, Asp N-G, eds. Iron nutrition in health and
disease, London: John Libbey & Co.
220
                 
Chapter 13: Iron
81. DeMaeyer, E ., Adiels-Tegman, M. & Raystone, E. 1985. The prevalence of anemia in
the world. World Health Stat Q., 38: 302-316.
82. Egderton, V.R. 1972. Iron deficiency anemia and physical performance and activity of
rats. J. Nutr., 102: 381-400.
83. Finch, C.A. , 1976. Iron deficiency in the rat. Physiological and biochemical studies of
muscle dysfunction. J. Clin. Investig., 58: 447-53.
84. Scrimshaw, N.S. 1984. Functional consequences of iron deficiency in Human
populations. J. Nutr.  Sci. Vit., 30: 47-63.
85. Lozoff, B., Jimenez, E. & Wolf, A. 1991. Long-term developmental outcome of infants
with iron deficiency. N. Engl. J. Med., 325: 687-694.
86. Youdim, M.B.H. 1988. Brain iron:Neurochemical and behavioural aspects. New York,
Taylor & Francis.
87. Beard, J.L., Connor, J.R. & Jones, B.C. 1993. Iron in the brain. Nutr. Revs., 1: 157-170.
88. Pollitt, E. 1993. Iron deficiency and cognitive function. Ann. Rev. Nutr., 13: 521-37.
89. Brock, J.H. 1994. Iron in infection, immunity, inflammation and neoplasia. In: Brock JH
et al., eds. Iron metabolism in health and disease. p. 353-389. London, W.B.Saunders
Company Ltd.
90. Bruner, A.B. 1996. Randomised study of cognitive effects of iron supplementation in
non-anaemic iron-deficient adolescent girls. Lancet, 348: 992-96.
91. Rowland, T.W. 1988.The effect of iron therapy in the excersice capacity of non-anemic
iron-deficient adolescent runners. Am. J. Dis. Child., 142: 165-169.
92. Ballin, A. 1992. Iron state in female adolescents. Am. J. Dis. Child., 146: 803-805.
93. Zhu ,Y.I. & Haas, J.D. 1997. Iron depletion without anemia and physical performance in
young women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 334-41.
94. Hallberg, L. 1988. Iron balance in pregnancy. In: Berger H, ed. Vitamins and minerals in
pregnancy and lactation. p. 115-127. Nestlé Nutrition Workshop Series Vol 16. New
York: Raven Press.
95. Hallberg, L. 1992. Iron balance in pregnancy and lactation. In: Fomon SJ., Zlotkin S, eds.
Nutritional anemias. New York: Raven Press, Ltd. p.13-25. Nestlé Nutrition Workshop
Series, vol 30).
96. Lieberman, E., Ryan, K.J. & Monsen, R.R. 1988. Association pf maternal hematocrit
with premature labour. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol., 159: 107-114.
97. Garn, S.M., Ridella, S.A., Petzold, A.S. & Falkner, F. 1981. Maternal hematological
levels and pregnancy outcome. Semin Perinatol., 5: 155-162.
98. Rossander, L., Hallberg, L. & Björn-Rasmussen, E. 1979. Absorption of iron from
breakfast meals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 32: 2484-2489.
99. Hallberg, L. & Rossander, L. 1982. Bio-availability of iron from Western-type whole
meals. Scand. J. Gastroenterol., 17: 151-160.
100. Galan, P. 1990. Iron absorption from typical West African meals containing
contaminating Fe. Br. J. Nutr., 64: 541-546.
101. Acosta, A. 1984. Iron absorption from typical Latin American meals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
39: 953-962.
102. Rao, B.S.N., Vijayasarathy, C. & Prabhavathi, T. 1983. Iron absorption from habitual
diets of Indians studied by the extrinsic tag technique. Indian J. Med.. 77: 648-657.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
221
103. Aung-Than-Batu, Thein-Than & Thane-Toe. 1976. Iron absorption from Southeast
Asian rice-based meals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 29: 219-225.
104. Hallberg, L. 1974. Iron absorption from Southeast Asian diets. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 27:
826-836.
105. Hallberg, L. 1977. Iron absorption from Southeast Asian diets. II. Role of various factors
that might explain low absorption. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,  30: 539-548.
106. Hallberg, L.  1978. Iron absorption from South-East Asian diets and the effect of iron
fortification. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 31: 1403-1408.
107. Hallberg, L., Björn-Rasmussen, E. & Rossander, L.R.S. 1979. The measurement of
food iron absorption in man. A methodological study on the measurement of dietary
non-haem-Fe absorption when the subjects have a free choice of food items. Br. J. Nutr.
41: 283-289.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
223
Tissue distribution and functions of magnesium
T
he human body contains about 760 mg of magnesium at birth, approximately 5 g at age
4–5 months, and 25 g when adult (1–3). Of the body’s magnesium, 30–40 percent is
found in muscles and soft tissues, 1 percent is found in extracellular fluid, and the
remainder is in the skeleton, where it accounts for up to 1 percent of bone ash (4, 5).
Soft tissue magnesium functions as a co-factor of many enzymes involved in energy
metabolism, protein synthesis, RNA and DNA synthesis, and maintenance of the electrical
potential of nervous tissues and cell membranes. Of particular importance with respect to the
pathologic effects of magnesium depletion is the role of this element in regulating potassium
fluxes and its involvement in the metabolism of calcium (6–8). Magnesium depletion
depresses both cellular and extracellular potassium and exacerbates the effects of low-
potassium diets on cellular potassium content. Muscle potassium becomes depleted as
magnesium deficiency develops, and tissue repletion of potassium is virtually impossible
unless magnesium status is restored to normal. Low plasma calcium develops frequently as
magnesium status declines. It is not clear whether this occurs because parathyroid hormone
release is inhibited or, more probably, because of a reduced sensitivity of the bone to
parathyroid hormone, thus restricting withdrawal of calcium from the skeletal matrix.
Between 50 percent and 60 percent of body magnesium is located within bone, where
it is thought to form a surface constituent of the hydroxyapatite (calcium phosphate) mineral
component. Initially much of this magnesium is readily exchangeable with serum and
therefore represents a moderately accessible magnesium store, which can be drawn on in
times of deficiency. However, the proportion of bone magnesium in this exchangeable form
declines significantly with increasing age (9).
Significant increases in bone mineral density of the femur have been associated
positively with rises in erythrocyte magnesium when the diets of subjects with gluten-
sensitive enteropathy were fortified with magnesium (10). Little is known of other roles for
magnesium in skeletal tissues.
Origins and effects of magnesium deficiency
Pathologic effects of primary nutritional deficiency of magnesium occur infrequently in
infants (11) but are even less common in adults unless a relatively low magnesium intake is
accompanied by prolonged diarrhoea or excessive urinary magnesium losses (12).
Susceptibility to the effects of magnesium deficiency rises when demands for magnesium
increase markedly with the resumption of tissue growth during rehabilitation from general
malnutrition (6, 13). Studies have shown that a decline in urinary magnesium excretion during
protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) is accompanied by a reduced intestinal absorption of
magnesium. The catch-up growth associated with recovery from PEM is achieved only if
magnesium supply is increased substantially (6, 14).
Most of the early pathologic consequences of magnesium depletion are neurologic or
neuromuscular defects (12, 15), some of which probably reflect the influence of the element
on potassium flux within tissues. Thus, a decline in magnesium status produces anorexia,
Chapter 14
Magnesium
224
                 
Chapter 14: Magnesium
nausea, muscular weakness, lethargy, staggering, and, if deficiency is prolonged, weight loss.
Progressively increasing with the severity and duration of depletion are manifestations of
hyperirritability, hyperexcitability, muscular spasms, and tetany, leading ultimately to
convulsions. An increased susceptibility to audiogenic shock is common in experimental
animals. Cardiac arrhythmia and pulmonary oedema frequently have fatal consequences (12).
It has been suggested that a sub-optimal magnesium status may be a factor in the aetiology of
coronary heart disease and hypertension but additional evidence is needed (16).
Dietary sources, absorption, and excretion of magnesium
Dietary deficiency of magnesium of a severity sufficient to provoke pathologic changes is
rare. Magnesium is widely distributed in plant and animal foods, and geochemical and other
environmental variables rarely have a major influence on its content in foods. Most green
vegetables, legume seeds, peas, beans, and nuts are rich in magnesium, as are some shellfish,
spices, and soya flour, all of which usually contain more than 500 mg/kg fresh weight.
Although most unrefined cereal grains are reasonable sources, many highly refined flours,
tubers, fruits, and fungi and most oils and fats contribute little dietary magnesium (<100
mg/kg fresh weight) (17–19). Corn flour, cassava and sago flour, and polished rice flour have
an extremely low magnesium content. Table 45 presents representative data for the dietary
magnesium intakes of infants and adults.
Table 45
Typical daily intakes of magnesium by infants (6 kg) and adults (65 kg)
Group and source of intake (reference)
Infants: 750 ml liquid milk or formula as sole food source
Human milk
   Finland (17)
24 (23-25)
   United States (11, 20)
23 (18-30)
   United Kingdom (21, 22)
21 (20-23)
   India (23)
24 ± 0.9
Formula
   United States (11, 20)
30–52
   United Kingdom (whey based) (24)
30–52
   United Kingdom (soya based) (24)
38–60
Adults: conventional diets
   France, males (25)
369 ± 106
   France, females (25)
280 ± 84
   United Kingdom, males (26)
323
   United Kingdom, females (26)
237
   United States, males (27, 28)
329
   United States, females (27, 28)
207
   India (29)
300–680
   China, females (30)
190 ± 59
      
232 ± 62
333 ± 103
a Mean ± SD or mean (range).
Magnesium intake,
mg/day a
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
225
Stable isotope studies with 25Mg and 26Mg indicate that between 50 percent and 90
percent of the labelled magnesium from maternal milk and infant formula can be absorbed by
infants (11, 20). Studies with adults consuming conventional diets show that the efficiency of
magnesium absorption can vary greatly depending on magnesium intake (31, 32). In one
study 25 percent of magnesium was absorbed when magnesium intake was high compared
with 75 percent when intake was low (33). During a 14-day balance study a net absorption of
52 ± 8 percent was recorded for 26 adolescent females consuming 176 mg magnesium daily
(34). Although this intake is far below the US recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for this
age group (280 mg/day), magnesium balance was still positive and averaged 21 mg/day. This
provided one of several sets of data illustrating the homeostatic capacity of the body to adapt
to a wide variety of ranges in magnesium intake (35, 36). Magnesium absorption appears to
be greatest within the duodenum and ileum and occurs by both passive and active processes
(37).
High intakes of dietary fibre (40–50 g/day) lower magnesium absorption. This is
probably attributable to the magnesium-binding action of phytate phosphorus associated with
the fibre (38-40). However, consumption of phytate- and cellulose-rich products (usually
containing high concentrations of magnesium) increases magnesium intake, which often
compensates for the decrease in absorption. The effects of dietary components such as phytate
on magnesium absorption are probably critically important only at low magnesium intake.
There is no consistent evidence that modest increases in the intake of calcium (34-36), iron, or
manganese (22) affect magnesium balance. In contrast, high intakes of zinc (142 mg/day)
decrease magnesium absorption and contribute to a shift toward negative balance in adult
males (41).
The kidney has a very significant role in magnesium homeostasis. Active reabsorption
of magnesium takes place in the loop of Henle in the proximal convoluted tubule and is
influenced by both the urinary concentration of sodium and probably by acid-base balance
(42). The latter relationship may well account for the observation from Chinese studies that
dietary changes which result in increased urinary pH and decreased titratable acidity also
reduce urinary magnesium output by 35 percent despite marked increases in dietary
magnesium input for vegetable protein diets (30). Several studies have now shown that
dietary calcium intakes in excess of 2600 mg/day (37), particularly if associated with high
sodium intakes, contribute to a shift toward negative magnesium balance or enhance its
urinary output (42, 43).
Criteria for assessing magnesium requirements and allowances
In 1996 Shils and Rude (44) published a constructive review of past procedures used to derive
estimates of magnesium requirements. They questioned the arguments of many authors that
metabolic balance studies are probably the only practicable, non-invasive techniques for
assessing the relationships of magnesium intake to magnesium status. At the same time, they
emphasised the great scarcity of data on variations in urinary magnesium output and on
magnesium levels in serum, erythrocytes, lymphocytes, bone, and soft tissues. Such data are
needed to verify current assumptions that pathologic responses to a decline in magnesium
supply are not likely occur to if magnesium balance remains relatively constant.
In view of the recent conclusion that many estimates of dietary requirements for
magnesium were “based upon questionable and insufficient data” (44), a closer examination is
needed of the value of biochemical criteria for defining the adequacy of magnesium status
(13). Attention could be paid to the effects of changes in magnesium intake on urinary
magnesium-creatinine ratios (45), the relationships between serum magnesium-calcium and
magnesium-potassium concentrations (7, 8), and other functional indicators of magnesium
status.
226
                 
Chapter 14: Magnesium
Estimated allowances of magnesium
The scarcity of studies from which to derive estimates of dietary allowances for magnesium
has been emphasised by virtually all the agencies faced with this task. One United Kingdom
agency commented particularly on the scarcity of studies with young subjects, and
circumvented the problem of discordant data from work with adolescents and adults by
restricting the range of studies considered (21). Using experimental data virtually identical to
those used for a detailed critique of the basis for US estimates (27), the Scientific Committee
for Food of the European Communities (46) did not propose magnesium allowances (or
population reference intakes, PRIs) because of inadequate data. Instead, they offered an
acceptable range of intakes for adults of 150–500 mg/day and described a series of quasi-PRI
values for specific age groups, including an increment of 30 percent to allow for individual
variations in growth. Statements of acceptable intakes leave uncertainty as to the extent of
overestimation of derived recommended intakes.
It is questionable whether more reliable estimates of magnesium requirements can be
made until data from balance studies are supported by the use of biochemical indexes of
adequacy that could reveal the development of manifestations of sub-optimal status. Such
indexes have been examined, for example, by Nichols et al. (14) in their studies of the
metabolic significance of magnesium depletion during PEM. A loss of muscle and serum
magnesium resulted if total body magnesium retention fell below 2 mg/kg/day and was
followed by a fall in the myofibrillar nitrogen-collagen ratio of muscle and a fall in muscle
potassium content. Repletion of tissue magnesium status preceded a threefold increase in
muscle potassium content. It accelerated by 7–10 days at the rate of recovery of muscle mass
and composition initiated by restitution of nitrogen and energy supplies to infants previously
deficient.
Neurologic signs such as hyper-irritability, apathy, tremors, and occasional ataxia
accompanied by low concentrations of potassium and magnesium in skeletal muscle and
strongly negative magnesium balances were reported by many other studies of protein calorie
deficiency in infants (47–49). Particularly noteworthy is evidence that all these effects are
ameliorated or eliminated by increased oral magnesium, as were specific anomalies in the
electrocardiographic T-wave profiles of such malnourished subjects (49). Evidence that the
initial rate of growth at rehabilitation is influenced by dietary magnesium intake indicates the
significance of this element for those involved in the aetiology of the PEM syndromes (31,
50).
Regrettably, detailed studies have yet to be carried out to define the nature of changes
resulting from a primary deficiency of dietary magnesium. Definition of magnesium
requirements must continue to be based on the limited information provided by balance
techniques, which give little or no indications of responses to inadequacy in magnesium
supply which may induce covert pathologic changes. Reassurance must thus be sought from
the application of dietary standards for magnesium in communities consuming diets differing
widely in magnesium content (29). The inadequate definition of lower acceptable limits of
magnesium intakes raises concern in communities or individuals suffering malnutrition or
from a wider variety of nutritional or other diseases which influence magnesium metabolism
adversely (12, 51, 52).
Derivation of allowances for magnesium
The infrequency with which magnesium deficiency develops in human-milk-fed infants
implies that the content and physiologic availability of magnesium in human milk meets the
infants’ requirements. The intake of maternal milk from exclusively human-milk-fed infants
1–10 months of age ranges from 700 to 900 g/day in both industrialized and developing
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
227
countries (53). If the magnesium content of milk is assumed to be 29 mg/l (11, 54, 55), the
intake from milk is 20–26 mg/day, or approximately 0.04 mg/kcal.
The magnesium in human milk is absorbed with substantially greater efficiency (about
80–90 percent) than that of formula milks (about 55–75 percent) or solid foods (about 50
percent) (56), and such differences must be taken into account when comparing differing
dietary sources. For example, a daily intake of 23 mg from maternal milk probably yields 18
mg available magnesium, a quantity similar to that of the 36 mg or more suggested as meeting
the requirements of young infants given formula or other foods (Table 46).
An indication of a likely requirement for magnesium at other ages can be derived
from studies of magnesium-potassium relationships in muscle (58) and the clinical recovery
of young children rehabilitated from malnutrition with or without magnesium fortification of
therapeutic diets. Nichols et al. (14) showed that 12 mg magnesium/day was not sufficient to
restore positive magnesium balances, serum magnesium content, or the magnesium and
potassium contents of muscle of children undergoing PEM rehabilitation. Muscle potassium
was restored to normal by 42 mg magnesium/day but higher intakes of dietary magnesium, up
to 160 mg/day, were needed to restore muscle magnesium to normal. Although these studies
show clearly that magnesium synergized growth responses resulting from nutritional
rehabilitation, they also indicated that rectification of earlier deficits of protein and energy
was a pre-requisite to initiation of this effect of magnesium.
Similar studies by Caddell et al. (49, 50) also illustrate the secondary significance of
magnesium accelerating clinical recovery from PEM. They indicate that prolonged
consumption of diets low in protein and energy and with a low ratio (<0.02) of magnesium (in
milligrams) to energy (in kilocalories) can induce pathologic changes which respond to
increases in dietary magnesium supply. It is noteworthy that of the balance trials intended to
investigate magnesium requirements, none has yet included treatments with magnesium-
energy ratios of <0.04 or induced pathologic responses.
The relationship Mg = (kcal x 0.0099) - 0.0117 (SE ± 0.0029) holds for many
conventional diets (59). Some staple foods in common use have very low magnesium
contents; cassava, sago, corn flour or cornstarch, and polished rice all have low magnesium-
energy ratios (0.003–0.02) (18). Their use in bulk merits appraisal of total dietary magnesium
content.
It has been reported, with increasing frequency, that high  percents (e.g., <70 percent)
(25) of individuals from some communities in Europe have magnesium intakes substantially
lower than estimates of magnesium requirements derived principally from US and UK
sources (21, 27). Such reports emphasise the need for reappraisal of estimates for reasons
previously discussed (44).
The estimates submitted by this Consultation must be regarded as provisional. Until
additional data become available, these estimates reflect consideration of anxieties that
previous recommendations for magnesium are overestimates. They make greater allowance
for developmental changes in growth rate and in protein and energy requirements. In
reconsidering data cited in previous reports (21, 27, 46), particular attention has been paid to
balance data suggesting that the experimental conditions established have provided reasonable
opportunity for the development of equilibrium during the investigation (34, 60-62).
Recommended magnesium intakes are presented in Table 46 together with indications
of the relationships of each recommendation to relevant estimates of the average requirements
for dietary protein, and energy (19).
228
                 
Chapter 14: Magnesium
Table 46
Recommended nutrient intakes for magnesium (Mg) in milligrams (mg)
Assumed
body weight
Mg/g
protein
Mg/kcal/day
Infants and children
0–6 months
  Human-milk fed
6
26
2.5
0.05
  Formula fed
6
36
6.0
2.9
0.06
7–12 months
9
54
6.0
3.9
0.06
1–3 years
12
60
5.5
4.0
0.05
4–6 years
19
76
4.0
3.9
0.04
7–9 years
25
100
4.0
3.7
0.05
Adolescents, 10–18 years
  Females
49
220
4.5
5.2
0.10
  Males
51
230
3.5
5.2
0.09
Adults, 19–65 years
  Females
55
220
4.0
4.8
0.10
  Males
65
260
4.0
4.6
0.10
65+ years
  Females
54
190
3.5
4.1
0.10
  Males
64
224
3.5
4.1
0.09
a No increment for pregnancy; 50 mg/day increment for lactation.
b Assumed body weights of age groups derived by interpolation (57).
c Intake per gram of recommended protein intake for age of subject (21).
d Intake per kilocalorie estimated average requirement (21).
Age Groupa
The detailed studies of magnesium economy during malnutrition and subsequent
therapy, with or without magnesium supplementation, provide reasonable grounds that the
dietary magnesium recommendations derived herein for young children are realistic. Data for
other ages are more scarce and are confined to magnesium balance studies. Some have paid
little attention to the influence of variations in dietary magnesium content and of the effects of
growth rate before and after puberty on the normality of magnesium-dependent functions.
It is assumed that during pregnancy the foetus accumulates 8 mg and foetal adnexa
accumulate 5 mg magnesium. If it is assumed that this dietary magnesium is absorbed with 50
percent efficiency, the 26 mg required over a pregnancy of 40 weeks (0.09 mg/day) can
probably be accommodated by adaptation. A lactation allowance of 50–55 mg/day for dietary
magnesium is made for the secretion of milk containing 25–28 mg magnesium (21 ,64). An
absorption efficiency of 50 percent is assumed for all solid diets; data are not sufficient to
allow for the adverse influence of phytic acid on magnesium absorption from high-fibre diets
or from diets with a high content of pulses. Not surprisingly, few of the representative dietary
analyses presented in Table 45 fail to meet these allowances. The few exceptions, deliberately
selected for inclusion, are the marginal intakes (232 ± 62 mg) of the 168 women of Changle
county and the lower intake (190 ± 59 mg) of 147 women surveyed from Tuoli county China
(30).
Upper tolerable limits of magnesium intake
Magnesium from dietary sources is relatively innocuous. Contamination of food or water
supplies with magnesium salt has been known to cause hypermagnesemia, nausea,
hypotension, and diarrhoea. Intakes of 380 mg magnesium as magnesium chloride have
RNI
Relative intake ratios
kgb
mg/day
Mg/kg
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
229
produced such signs in women. Upper limits of 65 mg for children ages 1–3 years, 110 mg for
4–10 years, and 350 mg for adolescents and adults are suggested as tolerable limits for the
content of soluble magnesium in foods and drinking water (63).
Relationships to previous estimates
The recommended intakes for infants ages 0–6 months take account of differences in the
physiologic availability of magnesium from maternal milk as compared with infant formulas
or solid foods. With the exception of the Canadian RNI estimates, which are 20 mg/day for
ages 0–4 months and 32 mg/day for ages 5–12 months (64), other national estimates
recommend intakes as RDAs or RNIs which substantially exceed the capacity of the lactating
mother to supply magnesium for her offspring.
Recommendations for other ages are based subjectively on the absence of any
evidence that magnesium deficiency of nutritional origin has occurred after consumption of a
range of diets sometimes supplying considerably less than the US RDA or the UK RNI
recommendations based on estimates of average magnesium requirements of 3.4–7 mg/kg
body weight. The recommendations submitted herewith assume that demands for magnesium
plus a margin of approximately 20 percent (to allow for methodologic variability) are
probably met by allowing approximately 3.5–5 mg/kg from pre-adolescence to maturity. This
assumption yields estimates virtually identical to those for Canada. Expressed as magnesium
allowance (in milligrams) divided by energy allowance (in kilocalories) (the latter based upon
energy recommendations from UK estimates (21), all the recommendations of Table 46
exceed the provisionally estimated critical minimum ratio of 0.02.
It is appreciated that magnesium demand probably declines in late adulthood as
requirements for growth diminish. However, it is reasonable to expect that the efficiency with
which magnesium is absorbed declines in elderly subjects. It may well be that the
recommendations are overgenerous for elderly subjects, but data are not sufficient to support
a more extensive reduction than that indicated.
Future research 
There is need for closer investigation of the biochemical changes that develop as magnesium
status declines. The responses to magnesium intake which influence the pathologic effects
resulting from disturbances in potassium utilisation caused by low magnesium should be
studied. They may well provide an understanding of the influence of magnesium status on
growth rate and neurologic integrity.
Closer investigation of the influence of magnesium status on the effectiveness of
therapeutic measures during rehabilitation from PEM is needed. The significance of
magnesium in the aetiology and consequences of PEM in children needs to be clarified.
Claims that restoration of protein and energy supply aggravates the neurologic features of
PEM if magnesium status is not improved merit priority of investigation. Failure to clarify
these aspects may continue to obscure some of the most important pathologic features of a
nutritional disorder in which evidence already exists for the involvement of a magnesium
deficit.
230
                 
Chapter 14: Magnesium
1. Widdowson, E.M., McCance, R.A. & Spray, C.M. 1951. The chemical composition of
the Human body. Clin. Sci., 10: 113-125.
2. Forbes, G.B. 1987.Human body composition: growth, aging, nutrition and activity. New
York. Springer-Verlag.
3. Schroeder, H.A., Nason, A.P. & Tipton, I.H. 1969. Essential metals in man:
magnesium. J. Chronic. Dis., 21: 815-841.
4. Heaton, F.W. 1976. Magnesium in intermediary metabolism. In: Magnesium in Health
and Disease. Canatin M., Seelig, M. eds. p 43-55. New York. SP Medical and Scientific
Books. 
5. Webster, P.O. 1987. Magnesium. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 45: 1305-1312.
6. Waterlow, J.C. 1992. Protein Energy Malnutrition. London, Edwin Arnold.
7. Classen, H.G. 1984. Magnesium and potassium deprivation and supplementation in
animals and man: aspects in view of intestinal absorption. Magnesium, 3: 257-264.
8. Al-Ghamdi, S.M., Cameron, E.C. & Sutton, R.A. 1994. Magnesium deficiency:
pathophysiologic and clinical overview. Am. J. Kidney Dis., 24: 737-754.
9. Breibart, S., Lee, J.S., McCoord, A. & Forbes, G. 1960. Relation of age to
radiomagnesium in bone. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 105: 361-363.
10. Rude, K.K. & Olerich, M. 1996. Magnesium deficiency: possible role in osteoporosis
associated with gluten-sensitive enteropathy. Osteoporos. Int., 6: 453-461.
11. Lonnerdal, B. 1995. Magnesium nutrition of infants. Magnesium . 8: 99-105.
12. Shils, M.E. 1988. Manesium in health and disease. Annu. Revs Nutr., 8: 429-460
13. Gibson, R.S. 1990. Principles of nutritional assessment. New York, Oxford University
Press. 
14. Nichols, B.L., Alvarado J., Hazelwood C.F. &  Viteri F. 1978. Magnesium supplement
in protein-calorie malnutrition. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,  31: 176-188.
15. Shils, M.E. 1969. . Experimental Human magnesium depletion. Medicine, 48: 61-85.
16. Elwood, P.C. 1994. Iron, magnesium and ischaemic heart disease. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53:
599-603.
17. Koivistoinen, P. 1980. Mineral content of Finnish foods. Acta Agric. Scand. 22: 7-171.
18. Paul, A.A. & Southgate, D.A.T. 1978. The Composition of Foods. London. HMSO. 
19. Tan, S.P., Wenlock, R.W. & Buss, D.H. 1985. Immigrant Foods: 2nd Suppt to the
Composition of Foods. London. HMSO. 
20. Lonnerdal, B. 1997. Effects of milk and milk components on calcium, magnesium and
trace element absorption during infancy. Physiol. Revs., 77: 643-669.
21. Department of Health. 1991. Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrients
for the United Kingdom. Report on Health and Social Subjects No. 41. London. HMSO.
22. Wisker, E., Nagel, R., Tamudjaja, T.K. & Feldheim, W. 1991. Calcium, magnesium,
zinc and iron blances in young women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 533-559.
23. Belavady, B. 1978. Lipid and trace element content of Human milk. Acta Pediatrica
Scand., 67: 566-9
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
231
24. Holland, B., Unwin, I.D. & Buss, D.H. 1989. Milk products and eggs. 4th Supplement to
The Composition of Foods. McCance R.A., Widdowson, E.M. Royal Society of
Chemistry, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London.
25. Galan, P., Preziosi, P., Durlach, V., Valeix, P., Ribas, L., Bouzid, D., Favier, A. &
Heraberg, S. 1997. Dietary magnesium intake in a French adult population. Magnesium,
10: 321-328.
26. Gregory, J., Foster, K., Tyler, H. & Wiseman, M. 1990. The dietary and nutritional
survey of British Adults. London, HMSO. 
27. Food and Nutrition Board/ National Research Council. 1989. Recommended Dietary
Allowances. 10th edition. Washington, National Academy Press.
28. Anonymous. 1997. Calcium and related nutrients. Nutr. Revs., 55: 335-341.
29. Parr, R.M., Crawley, H., Abdulla, M., Iyengar, G.V. & Kumpulainan, J. 1992.
Human dietary intakes of trace elements. A global literature survey mainly for the period
1970-1991. Report NAHRES. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency. 
30. Hu, J-F., Zhao, X-H. Parpia, B. & Campbell, T.C. 1993. Dietary intakes and urinary
excretion of calcium and acids: a cross-sectional study of women in China. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 58: 398-406.
31. Spencer, H., Lesniak, M. & Gatza, C.A., Osis, D. & Lender, M. 1980. Magnesium
absorption and metabolism in patients with chronic renal failure and in patients with
normal renal function. Gastroenterol., 79: 26-34.
32. Seelig, M.S. 1982. Magnesium requirements in Human nutrition. J. Med. Soc NJ., 70:
849-854.
33. Schwartz, R., Spencer, H. & Welsh, J.H. 1984. Magnesium absorption in Human
subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 39: 571-576.
34. Andon, M.B., Ilich, J.Z., Tzagornnis, & Matkovic, V. 1996. Magnesium balance in
adolescent females consuming a low- or high-calcium diet. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 63:
950-953.
35. Abrams, S.A., Grusak, M.A., Stuff, J. & O’Brien, K.O. 1997. Calcium and magnesium
balance in 9-14 year old children. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 1172-1177.
36. Sojka, J., Wastney, M., Abrams, S., Lewis, S.F., Martin, B., Weaver, C. & Peacock,
M. 1997. Magnesium kinetics in adolescent girls determined using stable isotopes: effects
of high and low calcium intakes. Am. J. Physiol., 273-42: R710-R715.
37. Greger, J.L., Smith, S.A. & Snedeker, S.M. 1981. Effect of dietary calcium and
phosphorus magnesium, manganese and selenium in adult males. Nutr. Res., 1: 315-325.
38. McCance, R.A. & Widdowson, E.M. 1942. Mineral metabolism on dephytinised bread.
J. Physiol., 101: 304-313.
39. McCance, R.A. & Widdowson, E.M. 1942. Mineral metabolism in healthy adults on
white and brown bread dietaries. J. Physiol., 101: 44-85.
40. Kelsay, J.L. Bahall, K.M. & Prather, E.S. 1979. Effect of fiber from fruit and
vegetables on the metabolic responses of Human subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 32: 1876-
1880.
41. Spencer, H., Norris,C. & Williams, D. 1994. Inhibitory effect of zinc on magnesium
balance and absorption in man. J. Am. Coll. Nutr., 13: 479-484.
42. Quarme, G.A. & Disks, J.H. 1986. The physiology of renal magnesium handling. Renal
Physiol.,  9: 257-269.
232
                 
Chapter 14: Magnesium
43. Kesteloot, H. & Joosens, J.V. 1990. The relationship between dietary intake and urinary
excretion of sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium. J. Hum. Hypertens., 4: 527-533.
44. Shils, M.E. & Rude, R.K. 1996. Deliberations and evaluations of the approaches,
endpoints and paradigms for magnesium dietary recommendations. J. Nutr., 126 (9
Suppl): 2398S-2403S.
45. Matos, V., van Melle, G., Boulat, O., Markert, M., Bachman, C. & Guignard, J.P.
1997. Urinary phosphate creatinine, calcium/creatinine and magnesium/creatinine ratios in
a healthy pediatric population. J. Pediatr., 131: 252-257.
46. Scientific Committee for Foods.  1993. Nutrient and Energy Intakes for the European
Community.  Report of the Scientific Committee for Food, Thirty First Series. European
Commission, Brussels.
47. Montgomery, R.D. 1960. Magnesium metabolism in infantile protein malnutrition.
Lancet,  2:74-75.
48. Linder, G.C., Hansen,D.L. & Karabus, C.D. 1963. The metabolism of magnesium and
other inorganic cations and of nitrogen in acute kwashiorkor. Pediatrics,  31: 552-568.
49. Caddel, J.L. 1969. Magnesium deficiency in protein-calorie malnutrition; a follow-up
study. Ann N Y Acad Sci., 162: 874-890.
50. Caddell, J.L. & Goodard, D.R. 1967. Studies in protein calorie malnutrition: I. Chemical
evidence for magnesium deficiency. N. Engl. J. Med.,  276: 533-535.
51. Brautbar, N., Roy, A. & Hom, P. 1990. Hypomagnesaemia and hypermagnesaemia. In:
Metals in Biological Systems - 26 Magnesium and its role in biology, nutrition and
physiology. p 215-320. Editors, Sigel, H., Sigel, A. New York, Dekker.
52. Elin, R.J. 1990. The assessment of magnesium status in Humans. In: Metals in Biological
Systems -26 Magnesium and its role in biology, nutrition and physiology. Editors: Sigel,
H., Sigel, A. p 579-596. New York, Dekker.
53. World Health Organization. 1998. Complementary feeding of young children in
developing countries. Geneva, WHO.
54. Iyengar, 
G.V. 
1982. 
Elemental 
composition 
of 
Human 
and 
animal 
milk.
IAEA-TECDOC-296 International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna.
55. Liu, Y.M.P., Neal, P., Ernst, J., Weaver, C., Richard, K., Smith,D.L. & Lemons, J.
1989. Absorption of calcium and magnesium from fortified Human milk by very low birth
weight infants. Pediatr Res., 25: 496-502.
56. Lonnerdal, B. 1977. Effects of milk and milk components on calcium, magnesium, and
trace element absorption during infancy. Physiol. Revs., 77: 643-669.
57. FAO. 1988. Requirements of vitamin A, iron, folate and vitamin B12. FAO Nutrition
Series No. 23. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization.
58. Dorup, I. 1994. Magnesium and potassium deficiency: its diagnosis, occurrence and
treatment. Institute of Physiology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.
59. Manalo, E., Flora, R.E. & Duel, S.E. 1967. A simple method for estimating dietary
magnesium. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 20: 627-631.
60. Mahalko, J.R., Sandstead, H.H., Johnson, L.K. & Milne, D.B. 1983. Effect of a
moderate increase in dietary protein on the retention and excretion of Ca, Cu, Fe, Mg, P,
and Zn by adult males. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37: 8-14.
61. Hunt, S.M. & Schofield, F.A. 1969. Magnesium balance and protein intake in adult
Human female. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 22: 367-373.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
233
62. Marshall, D.H., Nordin, B.E.C. & Speed, R. 1976. Calcium, phosphorus and
magnesium requirement. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 35: 163-173.
63. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. 1997. Dietary reference intakes for
Calcium, Phosphorous, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Flouride. Standing Committee on the
Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. Washington D.C., National Academy
Press.
64. Health and Welfare Canada. 1992. Nutrition Recommendations: Health and Welfare,
Canada. Report of the Scientific Review Committee, Ottawa, Supply and Services,
Canada.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
235
The role of selenium in human metabolic processes
Our understanding of the significance of selenium in the nutrition of human subjects has
grown rapidly during the past 20 years (1, 2). Demonstrations of its essentiality to rats and
farm animals were followed by appreciation that the development of selenium-responsive
diseases often reflected the distribution of geochemical variables which restricted the entry of
the element from soils into food chains. Such findings were the stimulus to in-depth
investigations of the regional relevance of selenium in human nutrition (3). These studies
have now yielded an increased understanding of the complex metabolic role of this trace
nutrient. Selenium has been implicated in the protection of body tissues against oxidative
stress, maintenance of defences against infection, and modulation of growth and development.
The selenium content of normal adult humans can vary widely. Values from 3 mg in
New Zealanders to 14 mg in some Americans reflect the profound influence of the natural
environment on the selenium contents of soils, crops, and human tissues. Approximately 30
percent of tissue selenium is contained in the liver, 15 percent in kidney, 30 percent in muscle,
and 10 percent in blood plasma. Much of tissue selenium is found in proteins as seleno-
analogues of sulphur amino acids; other metabolically active forms include selenotrisulphides
and other acid-labile selenium compounds. At least 15 selenoproteins have now been
characterised. Examples are given in Table 47.
Table 47
A selection of characterised selenoproteins
Protein
residues
Tissue distribution
Cytosolic glutathione peroxidase (GSHPx)
1
All, including thyroid
Phospholipid hydroperoxide GSHPx
1
All, including thyroid
Gastrointestinal GSHPx
1
Gastrointestinal tract
Extracellular GSHPx
1
Plasma, thyroid
Thioredoxin reductase
1 or 2
All including thyroid
Iodothyronine-deiodinase (type 1)
Iodothyronine-deiodinase (type 2)
Iodothyronine-deiodinase (type 3)
Brown adipose tissue,
CNS, and placenta
Selenoprotein P
Selenoprotein W
10
1
Plasma
Muscle
Sperm capsule selenoprotein
3
Sperm tail
Selenocysteine
1
Liver, kidneys, and thyroid
1
Central nervous system
(CNS), and pituitary
1
Chapter 15
Selenium
236
Chapter 15: Selenium
Functionally, there appear to be at least two distinct families of selenium-containing
enzymes. The first includes glutathione peroxidases (4) and thioredoxin reductase (5), which
are involved in controlling tissue concentrations of highly reactive oxygen-containing
metabolites. These metabolites are essential at low concentrations for maintaining cell-
mediated immunity against infections but highly toxic if produced in excess. The role of
selenium in the cytosolic enzyme glutathione peroxidase (GSHPx) was first illustrated in
1973. During stress, infection, or tissue injury, selenoenzymes may protect against the
damaging effects of hydrogen peroxide or oxygen-rich free radicals. This family of enzymes
catalyses the destruction of hydrogen peroxide or lipid hydroperoxides according to the
following general reactions:
where GSH is glutathione and GSSG is its oxidized form. At least four forms of GSHPx exist;
they differ both in their tissue distribution and in their sensitivity to selenium depletion (4).
The GSHPx enzymes of liver and blood plasma fall in activity rapidly at early stages of
selenium deficiency. In contrast, a form of GSHPx associated specifically with phospholipid-
rich tissue membranes is preserved against selenium deficiency and is believed to have
broader metabolic roles (e.g., in prostaglandin synthesis) (6). In concert with vitamin E,
selenium is also involved in the protection of cell membranes against oxidative damage (see
Chapter 6, Chapter 9, and Chapter 17).
The selenoenzyme thioredoxin reductase is involved in disposal of the products of
oxidative metabolism (5). It contains two selenocysteine groups per molecule and is a major
component of a redox system with a multiplicity of functions, among which is the capacity to
degrade locally excessive and potentially toxic concentrations of peroxide and hydroperoxides
likely to induce cell death and tissue atrophy (6).
Another group of selenoproteins is essential in the conversion of thyroxin, or
tetraiodothyronine (T4), to its physiologically active form, triiodothyronine (T3) (7). Three
types of these iodothyronine deiodinases, differing both in tissue distribution and sensitivity
to selenium deficiency, have been characterised. The consequences of a low selenium status
on physiologic responses to a shortage of iodine are complex. The influence of a loss of
selenium-dependent iodothyronine deiodinase differs in its severity depending on whether a
target tissue needs a preformed supply of T3 (e.g., via plasma) or whether, as with the brain,
pituitary gland, and placenta, it can rely upon local synthesis of T3 from T4. Despite this,
marked changes in the T3-T4 ratio as a consequence of a reduced selenium status (when iodine
supplies are also marginal) indicate the modifying influence of selenium on thyroid hormone
balance in both animal models and human subjects. Their possible significance can be
anticipated from the fact that whereas thyroid weights increase typically by 50 percent in rats
offered an iodine-deficient diet, thyroid weight is increased 154 percent by diets concurrently
deficient in both selenium and iodine.
Between 60 percent and 80 percent of selenium in human plasma is accounted for by a
well-characterised fraction designated selenoprotein P, the function of which has yet to be
determined. It is thought to be a selenium storage protein because there is limited evidence
that it also has an antioxidant role. At least 10 other selenoproteins exist, including one which
is a component of the mitochondrial capsule of sperm cells, damage to which may account for
the development of sperm abnormalities during selenium deficiency. Other aspects of the
function and metabolism of selenium are reviewed elsewhere (8, 9).
H2O2 + 2GSH Æ 2H2O + GSSG
ROOH + 2GSH Æ ROH + H2O + GSSG
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
237
Selenium deficiency
Non-endemic deficiencies of selenium
Biochemical evidence of selenium depletion (e.g., a decline in blood GSHPx activity) is not
uncommon in subjects maintained on parenteral or enteral feeding for long periods. Blood
selenium values declining to one-tenth of normal values have been reported when the
selenium content of such preparations has not been maintained by fortification (10, 11). Low
selenium contents of some commercial formulas for infants resulting in a fall in daily
selenium intake to approximately 0.5 µg/day have been shown to strongly exacerbate the fall
in serum selenium and GSHPx activity normally experienced from 2 to 8 months of age even
in human-milk-fed infants typically receiving threefold higher selenium intakes (12, 13). The
importance of maintaining trace element levels in such preparations was reviewed elsewhere
(14).
Clinical manifestations of deficiency arising from such situations are uncommon and
poorly defined. They include muscular weakness and myalgia with, in several instances, the
development of congestive heart failure. In at least one instance such pathologic signs have
developed as a consequence of a generally inadequate diet providing selenium at less than 10
µg/day. The 2-year-old subject recovered rapidly after selenium administration (15). With this
last exception, virtually all of the above reports describe observations with subjects under
close medical supervision. This may well be relevant to the scarcity of consistent pathologic
findings (16).
Keshan disease
Keshan disease was first described in Chinese medical literature more than 100 years ago, but
not until 40 years after its widespread occurrence in 1935 was it discovered that selenium
deficiency was an important factor in its aetiology (3). Endemic in children aged 2–10 years
and in women of childbearing age, this disease has a geographic distribution covering
localities from northeast to southwest China. Typical manifestations are fatigue after even
mild exercise, cardiac arrhythmia and palpitations, loss of appetite, cardiac insufficiency,
cardiomegaly, and congestive heart failure. Pathologic changes include a multifocal
myocardial necrosis and fibrosis. The coronary arteries are essentially unaffected.
Ultrastructural studies show that membranous organelles, such as mitochondria or
sarcolemma, are affected earliest. The disease has a marked seasonal fluctuation in incidence
(3) and may appear after only 3 months exposure to conditions in localities known to be
associated with a high risk of myocarditis (3, 8). Once the disease is established, selenium is
of little or no therapeutic value. Prophylaxis consisting of oral administration of selenium 3
months before the periods of highest anticipated risk is highly effective.
Although geographic similarities in the distribution of Keshan disease and the
selenium and vitamin E–responsive white muscle disease in animals first prompted successful
investigation of the relevance of a low selenium status, evidence has grown steadily that the
disease is multifactorial in origin. The strongest suspicions have fallen on the development of
a viral myocarditis probably attributable to enhancement of the virulence of a coxsackievirus
during its passage through selenium-deficient host tissues (17). Although other nutritional
variables such as a marginal vitamin E status may also be involved, the finding of extremely
low selenium contents in staple crops of affected areas and convincing demonstrations of the
prophylactic effectiveness of selenium administration leave no doubt that selenium deficiency
is the primary factor (3, 18).
Recent studies indicate that geochemical variables have an important influence on the
distribution of Keshan disease. Acid soils high in organic matter and iron oxide content
appear to be responsible for fixing selenium in forms which are poorly absorbed by staple
238
Chapter 15: Selenium
crops which, in the instance of cereal grains, typically have a selenium content of less than
0.01 µg/g (19). A similar geochemical background is believed to be associated with reports of
selenium-responsive disorders resembling Keshan disease in the Transbaikalia region of south
Siberia. Dietary intakes of selenium are inadequate to maintain blood GSHPx activity;
biochemical indicators of tissue peroxidative damage are elevated until selenium therapy is
initiated (8).
Kaschin-beck disease
A selenium-responsive bone and joint disease (osteoarthropathy) has been detected in children
aged 5–13 years in China and less extensively in south-east Siberia. The disease is
characterised by joint necrosis – epiphyseal degeneration of the arm and leg joints resulting in
structural shortening of the fingers and long bones with consequent growth retardation and
stunting (3, 20). Although not identical to Keshan disease, Kaschin-Beck disease also occurs
in areas where the availability of soil selenium for crop growth is low. The selenium contents
of hair and of whole blood are abnormally low and the blood content of GSHPx is reduced.
Although it is ameliorated by selenium therapy, other factors such as the frequent presence of
mycotoxins in cereal grains grown in the area may be involved. A spontaneous decrease in
incidence from 1970 (44 percent) to 1980 (14 percent) to 1986 (1 percent) has been attributed
to general improvements in the nutritional status of Chinese rural communities (20).
Selenium status and susceptibility to infection
As stated earlier, the expressions of the cardiac lesions of Keshan disease probably involve
not only the development of selenium deficiency but also the presence of a Coxsackie virus
(BA) infection. Animal studies have confirmed that selenium-deficient mice infected with
Coxsackie virus (CVB/0) were particularly susceptible to the virus. These studies also
illustrated that passage of the virus through selenium-deficient subjects enhanced its virulence
(17). Myocarditic virulence developed even in strains such as CVB/0 which normally were
not myopathogenic. The enhancement of virulence in this RNA virus involves modifications
to the nucleotide sequence of the phenotype. These modifications were maintained and
expressed even during subsequent passage through animals with normal selenium status (21).
Enhancing the virulence of a virus with a selenium deficiency (resulting either from a
nutritional challenge or an increased metabolic demand on tissue selenium depots) appears
not to be unique to the Coxsackie viruses. The early pre-clinical stages of development of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection are accompanied by a very marked decline in
plasma selenium. Sub-clinical malnutrition assumes increased significance during the
development of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). However, for the nutrients
affected, there are strong indications that only the extent of the decline in selenium status has
predictive value with respect to both the rate of development of AIDS and its resulting
mortality (22-25). The virulence of other RNA viruses such as hepatitis B and those
associated with the development of haemolytic anaemias are enhanced similarly by a decline
in selenium status. The mechanisms underlying these effects are not yet resolved. There are
indications that the loss of protective antioxidant functions dependent on selenium and
vitamin E are both involved and that the resulting structural changes in viral nucleotide
sequences are reproducible and appear to provoke additional selenoprotein synthesis (26). It is
suspected that this further depletes previously diminished pools of physiologically available
selenium and accelerates pathologic responses (27-29).
Whatever mechanisms are involved, further understanding is needed of the influence
of selenium status on susceptibility to viral diseases ranging from cardiomyopathies to
haemolytic anaemias. The relationship already illustrates the difficulty of defining nutritional
essentiality for nutrients which may primarily maintain defences against infection. Studies of
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
239
the effects of selenium deficiency in several experimental animal species have shown that the
microbicidal activity of blood neutrophils is severely impaired even though phagocytic
activity remains unimpaired (30, 31). The complexity of species differences in the influence
of selenium status on the effectiveness of cell-mediated immune processes is summarised
elsewhere (8).
The possibility that increased intakes of selenium might protect against the
development of cancer in humans has generated great interest (32). However, a number of
epidemiologic studies have now been reported which show no relationship between selenium
and cancer risk (33). Moreover, an analysis of the relationship between selenium and cancer
suggests that “the question of whether selenium protects against cancer is still wide open”
(34). An increased intake of selenium appears to stimulate tumorigenesis in some animal
models of pancreatic and skin cancer. In contrast, the protective effect of higher exposures to
selenium observed in several animal studies, together with small but statistically significant
differences in selenium blood plasma levels detected in some retrospective-prospective
studies of subgroups of people developing cancer, explains the continuing interest in the
anticarcinogenic potential of selenium. However, the results of prospective-retrospective
studies had no predictive value for individuals and could have reflected non-specific
influences on groups. The association between low selenium intake and high cancer risk,
although clearly of some interest, is in need of further investigation before a conclusion can
be reached.
Although a biochemical mechanism can be postulated whereby selenium could protect
against heart disease by influencing platelet aggregation (through an effect on the
prostacyclin-thromboxane ratio), the epidemiologic evidence linking selenium status and risk
of cardiovascular disease is still equivocal (33).
Selenium and thyroid hormones
The importance of selenium for thyroid hormone metabolism (35, 36) is evident from changes
in the T3-T4 ratio which develop after relatively mild selenium depletion in infants and elderly
(65+ years) subjects. Decreases in the T3-T4 ratio indicative of decreased thyroid hormone
balance have been detected when serum selenium falls below 0.9 µmol/l (37). In a recent
Scottish study these decreases were correlated with a decline in dietary and plasma selenium
after the replacement of selenium-rich wheat from Canada and the United States with
selenium-deficient wheat from European sources (38).
Communities noted for a high incidence of myxedematous cretinism have been found
to have low plasma selenium status and GSHPx activity in addition to having low iodine
status (39) and being exposed to high thiocyanate intakes from cassava. Restoration of iodine
supply, particularly if excessive, tends to induce a high peroxidative stress through the action
of iodide peroxidase, the first step in iodine utilisation by the thyroid. It is postulated that
necrosis and thyroid fibrosis leading to irreversible hypothyroidism result if a concurrent
deficiency of selenium limits peroxide destruction by the protective action of the selenium-
dependent enzymes, GSHPx and, more probably, thioredoxin reductase (40). In areas where
myxedematous cretinism is endemic and characterised by persistent hypothyroidism,
dwarfism, and stunting, it has been recommended that attempts to introduce iodine therapy for
mildly affected individuals should be preceded by an assessment of selenium status and
rectification of any observed deficit (39). Although this suggestion is compatible with
pathologic observations on hypothyroid rats differing in selenium status, its validity has yet to
be assessed adequately in humans (41, 42).
240
Chapter 15: Selenium
The influence of diet on selenium status
Environmental conditions and agricultural practices have a profound influence on the
selenium content of many foods. Tables 48, 49 and 50 illustrate the wide range of selenium
content of the principal food groups and the variability in the selenium content of individual
foods. This variability is exceeded only by that found in the iodine content of foods.
Geographic differences in the content and availability of selenium from soils to food crops
and animal products have a marked effect on the selenium status of entire communities. For
example, the distribution of Keshan disease and Kaschin-Beck disease in China reflects the
distribution of soils from which selenium is poorly available to rice, maize, wheat, and
pasture grasses (Table 48). Cereal crop selenium contents of 3–7 ng/g are not uncommon (3)
and it has been suggested that <10 ng/g for grain selenium and <3 ng/g for water-soluble soil
selenium could be used as indexes to define deficient areas (19). Fluctuations in the selenium
status of many communities in northern Europe reflect the intrinsically low selenium content
of its glacial soils and the extent to which selenium supplementation of fertilisers has been
successful in increasing the selenium content of cereal grains, milk, and other animal
products. Deliberate importation of cereals from areas with relatively high available selenium
in soil has also occurred or been recommended in some areas of Finland, New Zealand, and
the United Kingdom after steady declines in the selenium status of some communities were
noted. Conversely, low-selenium grains are being selected in China, India, and Venezuela to
reduce the risks of selenosis.
Comprehensive data summarising the selenium contents of staple foods are available
elsewhere (e.g., 45). Reports from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) provide representative
data on daily total selenium intakes for more than 40 countries (see reference 8, p 215–217).
The great influence of dietary and geographic variables on selenium status is evident from
recent summaries of data describing national and regional differences for the selenium content
of human and formula milks, diets, and human serum (Tables 48, 49, 50 and 51).
Absorption and bio-availability
Selenium compounds are generally very efficiently absorbed by humans, and selenium
absorption does not appear to be under homeostatic control (80). For example, absorption of
the selenite form of selenium is greater than 80 percent whereas that of selenium as
selenomethionine or as selenate may be greater than 90 percent (80, 81). Therefore, the rate-
limiting step determining the overall availability of dietary selenium is not likely to be its
absorption but rather its conversion within tissues to its metabolically active forms (e.g., its
incorporation into GSHPx or 5'-deiodinase) (40). A number of depletion-repletion
experiments have been carried out on animals to estimate the bio-availability of selenium in
human foods (82). Based on the restoration of GSHPx activity in depleted rats, the bio-
availability of selenium in wheat is quite good, usually 80 percent or better. The selenium in
Brazil nuts and beef kidney also appears readily available (90 percent or more by most
criteria). The selenium in tuna seems of lesser availability (perhaps only 20–60 percent of that
from selenite) whereas the availability of selenium from certain other seafoods (shrimp, crab,
and Baltic herring) is high. The selenium in a variety of mushrooms appears to be of
uniformly low availability to rats.
Data on the nutritional bio-availability of selenium to humans are sparse. A
supplementation study carried out on Finnish men of relatively low selenium status showed
that selenate selenium was as effective as the selenium in seleniferous wheat in increasing
platelet GSHPx activity (83). The wheat selenium, however, increased plasma selenium levels
more than did selenate selenium and once the supplements were withdrawn, platelet GSHPx
activity declined less in the group given wheat. This study showed the importance of
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
241
estimating not only short-term availability but also long-term retention and the convertibility
of tissue selenium stores into biologically active forms.
Table 48
The selenium contents of foods and diets
A. Typical ranges of selenium concentrations (ng/g fresh wt) in food groups.
International
compilation (8)
Cereals and cereal
products
Food group
India (43)
United States (44)
5–95
10–370
10–550
Meat, meat products,
and eggs
40–120
100–810
10–360
Fish and marine
280–1080
400–1500
110–970
Fish and freshwater
—
—
180–680
Pulses
10–138
—
—
Dairy products
5–15
10–130
1–170
Fruits and vegetables
1–7
1–60
1–20
B. Typical distribution of selenium in dietary constituents (µg/day) in selected countries.
China
China
India
India
Finland
United
Kingdom
Keshan
disease
area (18)
Total diet
7.7
16.4
27.4
52.5
30
31
Food group
Cereals and cereal
products
5.4
11.6
15.7
21.1
2.8
7
Pulses
—
—
3.9
3.6
1.1
—
Meat and eggs
—
3.7
9.2
10
Fish
—
18.4
9.5
4
Dairy products
>0.6
> 2.2
6.9
4.8
6.5
3
Fruits and
vegetables
1.7
2.6
0.9
0.9
0.5
6
Other
—
—
—
—
1.1
3
Disease-
free
area
(18)
Low-
income
vegetarian
diets (43)
Low-income
conventional
diets (43)
(45)
(46)
242
Chapter 15: Selenium
Table 49
Geographic differences in the selenium intakes of infants
(µg/day)a
Reference
Human milk
Region or country
China: Keshan disease
area
Burundi
4.7 ± 0.8
48
New Zealand: south
island
Former Yugoslavia
6.0 ± 1.3
50
Finland
4.0–7.6
51
New Zealand: north
island
Belgium
8.4
53
Austria
8.8–9.8
13
Australia
9.4 ± 3.6
54
Hungary
9.6 ± 3.7
50
Sweden
10.6 ± 2.3
50
United States, east
coast
United States,
unspecified
Zaire
12.3 ± 3.6
50
Chile
14.1 ± 2.6
50
India
14.1 ± 3.6
50
Germany
19.3
57
Philippines
22.9 ± 4.1
50
China (seleniferous
area)
International reference
value
Infant formula
Belgium
2.0
53
New Zealand
3.3
59
Austria
3.6
13
United Kingdom 
4.9 (2.3–8.2)
53
Spain
6.6
53
United States, 1982 
5.9 (4.2–8.1)
60
Germany
6.5-6.8
57
New Zealand (selenium
fortified)
United States, 1997
11.7–18.3
61
a Mean ± standard deviation (SD) or range. 
  Assumed age 6 months; assumed human milk or infant formula intake 750 ml (47).
Selenium intake
2.0
18
5.3
49
8.1–10.2
52
8.8–11.4
55
12.3
56
199
18
13.0 ± 18.2
58
11.3
59
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
243
Table 50
Geographic differences in the selenium intakes (µg/day) of adults
Region or  country
Selenium intake a
Reference
China, Keshan disease area
3–11
62, 63
China, Kaschin -Beck disease
area
Sweden, vegans
10
64
New Zealand, low-selenium area
11 ± 3
64, 65
China, disease-free area
13.3 ± 3.1
18
South Sweden, conventional diets
40 ± 4
66
India,vegan low income
27
43
Finland, before selenium
fertilization
Finland, after selenium
fertilization
Slovakia
27 ± 8
70
United Kingdom, 1974
60
38
United Kingdom, 1985
43
38
United Kingdom, 1994
32
38
United Kingdom, 1995
33
46
Italy
41
64
Germany
38–48
71
France
47
72
India, conventional diet
48
43
United States, all
80 ± 37
73
Males
90 ± 14
73
Females
74 ± 12
73
Canada
98–224
74
United States, seleniferous area
216
64
Venezuela
80–500
75
China, seleniferous area
1338
64
a Mean ± standard error or range.
2.6–5.0
20
26
67–69
56
67–69
244
Chapter 15: Selenium
Table 51
Representative mean serum selenium concentration (µmol/l)
Pathologic investigations
Keshan disease (China)
0.15–0.25
Kaschin-Beck disease (China)
0.22 ± 0.03
Myxoedematous cretins (Zaire)
0.26 ± 0.12
HIV and AIDSc
0.36–0.54
Data for normal subjects
Serbia and Croatia
0.63–0.85
Bulgaria
0.66–0.72
New Zealand
0.69
Hungary
0.71 ± 0.13
Norway
1.52–1.69
United States, Maryland
1.69–2.15
United States, South Dakota
2.17–2.50
Proposed reference ranges for healthy
subjects
0.5–2.5
0.67– 2.04
a References 8, 18, 23, 25, 44, 76–79. 
bRanges of means or mean ± standard error.
c HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; AIDS, acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
Criteria for assessing selenium requirements
Levander (84) convincingly illustrated the impracticability of assessing selenium
requirements from input-output balance data because the history of selenium nutrition
influences the proportion of dietary selenium absorbed, retained, or excreted. The changing
equilibria when selenium intake is varied experimentally yield data which are of limited value
for estimating minimal requirements. Examples are cited of estimates of selenium
requirement for adults of 7.4 and 80 µg/day derived from Chinese and United States studies,
respectively. Such discrepancies reflect differences in the usual daily selenium intakes of the
experimental subjects and the extent to which this was changed experimentally. This
situation, not unique to selenium, emphasises the importance of basing requirement estimates
on functional criteria derived from evidence describing the minimum levels of intake which,
directly or indirectly, reflect the normality of selenium-dependent processes.
New opportunities for the development of biochemical indexes of selenium adequacy
such as those listed in Table 47 have yet to be exploited. Until this is done, the most suitable
alternative is to monitor changes in the relationship of serum selenium to dietary selenium
supply, taking advantage of its relatively constant proportionality to the fraction of serum
selenium in functionally significant GSHPx (85).
A detailed review of 36 reports describing serum selenium values in healthy subjects
indicated that they ranged from a low of 0.52 µmol/l in Serbia to a high of 2.5 µmol/l in
Wyoming and South Dakota in the United States (76). It was suggested that mean values
within this range derived from 7502 apparently healthy individuals should be regarded
tentatively as a standard for normal reference. This survey clearly illustrated the influence of
crop management on serum selenium level; in Finland and New Zealand, selenium
fortification of fertilisers for cereals increased serum selenium from 0.6 to 1.5 µmol/l. A
summary of these data in Table 51 also includes representative mean serum selenium values
within the range of 0.15–0.55 µmol/l reported for specific diseases known to be associated
in specific studiesa
Sample Serum Selenium
Concentrationsb
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
245
with disturbances in selenium nutrition or metabolism. These include reports from studies of
Keshan disease, Kaschin-Beck disease, and specific studies of cretinism, hypothyroidism, and
HIV and AIDS where clinical outcome or prognosis has been related to selenium status.
This report and the report by the World Health Organization (WHO), FAO, and IAEA
(86) use virtually identical approaches to derive their estimates of basal requirements for
selenium (
basal
R
Se
). As yet there are no published reports suggesting that these basal estimates
using Se or GSHPx activity as criteria of adequacy are invalid. Some modification is
necessary however to estimate population minimum intakes with adequate allowance for the
variability (CV) associated with estimates of the average selenium intakes from the typical
diets of many communities. In the WHO-FAO-IAEA report (86) a CV of 16 percent was
assumed for the selenium conventional diets and 12.5 percent for the milk-based diets of
infants to limit the risks of inadequacy arising from unexpectedly low selenium contents.
More recent studies suggest that the variability of selenium intake from diets for which the
selenium content has been predicted rather than measured may be substantially greater than
estimated previously (Table 49 [47] and Table 50).
Recommended selenium intakes 
Because balance techniques were shown to be inappropriate for determining selenium
requirements, the WHO-FAO-IAEA report (86) presented requirement estimates based on of
epidemiologic evidence derived from areas of China endemic or non-endemic for Keshan
disease (18). These comprehensive biochemical and clinical studies showed that Keshan
disease did not occur in regions where the mean intake of selenium by adult males or females
was greater than 19.1 or greater than 13.3 µg/day, respectively. Although these intakes were
sufficient to eliminate clinical evidence of myocarditis and other signs of Keshan disease,
other studies showed that they were inadequate to restore erythrocyte or plasma selenium
concentrations or GSHPx activities to levels indicative of reserves.
Studies with adult male subjects initially of low selenium status given a carefully
monitored diet providing selenium at 11 µg/day together with supplements of
selenomethionine given orally which provided 0, 10, 30, 60, or 90 µg/day. Starting at frankly
deficient levels, total daily selenium intakes of above 41 µg/day were found sufficient
increase plasma GSHPx substantially and to saturate plasma activity in 60-kg male subjects
within 5–8 months. It was estimated that satisfactory levels of plasma selenium (>80 µmol/l)
and of GSHPx (>0.3 mmol NADPH oxidized/min/l; approximately two-thirds of plasma
saturation activity) indicative of adequate selenium reserves would be attained after intakes of
approximately 27 µg/day by 65-kg male subjects (86). Such criteria satisfying the definition
of average normative requirements for selenium ( Se R
normative ) have been used as the basis for
calculating recommended nutrient intake (RNI) values in this report after interpolating
estimates of average requirements by allowing for differences in weight and basal metabolic
rate of age groups to up to 65 years and adding a 25 percent increase (2 x assumed SD) to
allow for individual variability in the estimates of RNI (Table 52).
246
Chapter 15: Selenium
Table 52
Recommended nutrient intakes of selenium (µg/day)
RNIc,
µg/day
Infants and children
   0–6 months
6
0.85
5.1
6
   7–12 months
9
0.91
8.2
10
   1–3 years
12
1.13
13.6
17
   4–6 years
19
0.92
17.5
22
   7–9 years
25
0.68
17.0
21
Adolescents
   Female,10–18 years
49
0.42
20.6
26
  Male, 10–18 years
51
0.50
22.5
32
Adults
  Female,19–65 years
55
0.37
20.4
26
Male, 19–65 years
65
0.42
27.3
34
Female, 65+ years
54
0.37
20.2
25
   Male, 65+ years
64
0.41
26.2
33
Pregnancy
  2nd trimester
28
  3rd trimester
30
Lactation
  0–6 months post-partum
35
  7–12 months post-partum
42
a Weight (kg) interpolated from FAO/WHO (reference 86, page 8, Table 2.1).
b Derived from WHO-FAO-IAEA values (reference 86, page 116, Table 6.1, by interpolation).
Assumed
Age Group
c Recommended nutrient intake (RNI)  derived from average SeR
+ 2 x assumed standard error (of 12.5
percent)
The estimates of RNI for infants (Table 52) are compatible with estimates of the
international reference range of the selenium content of breast milk (18.5 µg /l; Table 49),
with data from an extensive international survey of breast milk selenium (WHO-IAEA [50])
and with WHO data (47) on the milk consumption of exclusively human-milk-fed infants in
developed and developing countries. Data from the WHO-IAEA (50) survey from six
countries suggest that the human milk from all countries met the RNI for infants aged 0–6
months. In two of six countries, Hungary and Sweden, the human milk selenium was
marginal with respect to the RNI for infants aged 7–12 months.
Data from Germany (13, 88), Austria (12), the United States (89), and elsewhere
suggest that infant formula may contain selenium in amounts insufficient to meet the RNI or
recommended dietary allowance for infants. Lombeck et al. (13) in an extensive study showed
that cow-milk-based formula could provide less than one-third of the selenium of human
milk. Estimates of selenium intake by 2-month-old infants were 7.8 µg/day from formula
compared with 22.4 µg/day from human milk. Levander (89) has suggested that infant
formulas should provide a minimum of 10 µg/day and not more than 45 µg/day. This
recommendation may well have been implemented judging from recent increases in the
selenium content of infant formulas (61).
Average normative requirement
normative
normative
Se R
Se R
Weight
(kg/day)
(total/day)
normative
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
247
Selenium requirements during pregnancy and lactation
Data from balance experiments are not sufficiently consistent for defining the increase of
selenium needed to support foetal growth and development during pregnancy. For this reason
the European Union Scientific Committee for Food (90), the UK Committee on Medical
Aspects of Food Policy (91), and the Netherlands Food and Nutrition Council (92) have
suggested that the component of selenium needed for human pregnancy is obtained by an
adaptive increase in the efficiency of absorption of dietary selenium rather than by an
increased dietary demand.
Others, contesting this view, have attempted to predict the increase of dietary selenium
needed for pregnancy by factorial estimation of the likely quantity of selenium incorporated
into the tissues of the foetus (47, 86). Such estimates have assumed that the total products of
conception amount to 4.6–6 kg lean tissue with a protein content of approximately 18.5–20
percent. If, as appears to be a reasonable assumption, the selenium content of this protein
resembles that of a skeletal muscle, growth of these tissues could account for between 1.0 and
4.5 µg/day of selenium depending on whether the analyses reflect consumption of diets from
a low-selenium (but non-pathogenic) environment (e.g., New Zealand [49, 52]) or from a
region with relatively high selenium intakes (e.g., United States, Table 50 [73]). Typically
such estimates have assumed an 80 percent absorption and utilisation of dietary selenium
from which it would appear reasonable to estimate that allowing for a variability of estimates
(CV 12.5 percent) an increase of 2 µg/day would be appropriate for the second trimester and 4
µg/day would be appropriate for the third trimester of pregnancy (Table 52).
As is evident from Table 49 the selenium content of human milk is sensitive to
changes in maternal dietary selenium. The increase of maternal dietary selenium needed to
meet requirements for lactation has been estimated from the estimated RNI for infants aged
0–6 months and 7–12 months. It is assumed that the selenium of maternal milk is used with an
efficiency of 80 percent, and a SD of 12.5 percent is assumed. For the period 0–6 months it is
estimated that the infant must receive 6 µg/day from human milk. The increase of maternal
dietary selenium required to produce this will be 6 x 
100 + (2 x SD) = 9 µg/day. The
corresponding increase needed to meet the infant RNI of 10 µg/day for ages 7–12 months will
be 16 µg/day. Added to the non-pregnancy maternal RNI of 26 µg/day, the total RNI for
lactation during the first 6 months post-partum will be 35 µg/day and for months 7–12 will be
42 µg/day (Table 52).
As implied by the data in Tables 48, 49  and 50, agricultural growing practices,
geologic factors, and social deprivation enforcing the use of an abnormally wide range of
dietary constituents may significantly modify the variability of dietary selenium intakes. If
accumulated experience suggests that the CV of selenium intake may be 40 percent or more
and tabulated rather than analysed data are used to predict the dietary content of selenium, the
selenium allowance may have to be increased accordingly or assessed by using the WHO-
FAO-IAEA technique (86).
Upper tolerable nutrient level for selenium
A comprehensive account of the clinically significant biochemical manifestations of chronic
and acute intoxication from selenium arising from high concentrations in food, drinking
water, and the environment were published jointly by WHO and the United Nations
Environment Programme and the International Labour Organisation (80). This report (44)
stresses that the signs and symptoms of human overexposure to selenium are not well defined.
Common clinical features are hair loss and structural changes in the keratin of hair and of
nails, the development of icteroid skin, and gastrointestinal disturbances (93, 94). An
increased incidence of nail dystrophy has been associated with consumption of high-selenium
248
Chapter 15: Selenium
foods supplying more than 900 µg/day. These foods were grown in selenium-rich
(seleniferous) soil from specific areas in China (95). A positive association between dental
caries and urinary selenium output under similar circumstances was reported (96, 97).
Sensitive biochemical markers of impending selenium intoxication have yet to be
developed. In their absence it is suggested that the upper tolerable nutrient intake level (UL)
for selenium should be set, provisionally, at 400 µg/day for adults. It is noteworthy that a
maximum tolerable dietary concentration of 2 mg/kg dry diet was suggested for all classes of
domesticated livestock and has proved satisfactory in use (98). This suggests that the
proposed UL of 400 µg/day for human subjects provides a fully adequate margin of safety.
The UL for children and for pregnant or lactating women has yet to be determined.
Comparison with previous estimates
Compared with WHO-FAO-IAEA (86), US (87), UK (91), and European Union (90)
recommendations, the present proposals represent a significant decrease in the suggested need
for selenium. Reasons for this are:
• the need to derive recommendations which are applicable for a proportionally lower
weight range than for most Western and developed communities;
• the decision, also accepted by WHO, FAO, and IAEA (86), that it is neither essential nor
desirable to maintain selenium status at a level which fully saturates blood GSHPx activity
when, on current evidence, this is not an advantage for health; and
• the decision to present estimates as RNIs which, although including an allowance for
individual variability, do not provide for the possibility that foods may often differ widely
in selenium content according to their geographic sources.
The reduced estimates presented in this report are physiologically justifiable and will only
give rise to concern if there are grounds for serious uncertainty as to the predictability of
dietary selenium intake.
Food commodity inputs are changing rapidly and in some instances, unpredictably.
Under most circumstances it will be unreasonable to expect that the often marked influence of
geographic variability on the supply of selenium from cereals and meats can be taken into
account. Changes in trade patterns with respect to the sources of cereals and meats are already
having significant influences on the selenium nutrition of consumer communities (38, 66).
Such evidence fully justifies the warning to allow for a high intrinsic variability of dietary
selenium content when estimating selenium requirements of populations for which the
principal sources of this microelement are unknown.
Future research
Relationships between selenium status and pathologically relevant biochemical indexes of
deficiency merit much closer study with the object of providing more reliable and earlier
means of detecting a suboptimal status.
Indications that a suboptimal selenium status may have much wider significance in
influencing disease susceptibility must be pursued. Such studies must cover both the impact
of selenium deficiency on protection against oxidative damage during tissue trauma and its
genetic implication for viral virulence.
We lack knowledge of the influence of soil composition on the selenium content of
cereals and animal tissues. Chinese experience with respect to the dramatic influence of soil
iron and low pH on selenium availability may well be relevant to extensive tracts of lateritic
soils in Africa and elsewhere. There are grounds for the belief that factors in common for
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
249
selenium and iodine may influence their supply and availability from soils into the human
food chain. FAO should be encouraged to develop studies relevant to the influence of soil
conditions on the supply of these two metabolically interdependent elements which affect
human health.
The early detection of selenium toxicity (selenosis) is hindered by a lack of suitable
biochemical indicators. Effective detection and control of selenosis in many developing
countries awaits the development of improved specific diagnostic techniques.
250
Chapter 15: Selenium
1. Levander, O.A. 1986. Selenium. In: Trace elements in human and animal nutrition 5th
edn. Mertz, W. ed. p 209-279. Orlando, Florida 209-279. Academic Press Inc. 
2. Arthur, J.R. & Beckett, G.J. 1994. Neometabolic roles for selenium. Proc. Nutr. Soc.
53: 615-624.
3. Ge, K. & Yang, G. 1993. The epidemiology of selenium deficiency in the etiological
study of endemic diseases in China. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., Supplement 57: 259S-263S.
4. Arthur, J.R., Bermano, G., Mitchell, J.H. & Hesketh, J.E. 1996. Regulation of
selenoprotein gene expression and thyroid hormone metabolism. Biochem. Soc. Trans.,
24: 384-388.
5. Howie, A.F., Arthur, J.R., Nicol, T., Walker, S.W., Beech, S.G. & Beckett, G.J. 1998.
Identification of a 57-kilodalton selenoprotein in human thyrocytes as thioredoxin
reductase. J. Clin. Endocrino.l Metab., 83: 2052-2058.
6. Mairrino, M., Thomas, J.P., Girotti, A.W. & Ursini, F. 1991. Reactivity of
phospholipd hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase with membrane and lipoprotein lipid
hydroperoxides. Free. Radic. Res. Commun. 12: 131-135.
7. Arthur, J. 1997. Selenium biochemistry and function. In: Trace Elements in Man and
Animals - 9. Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on Trace Elements in
Man and Animals. Fischer, P.W.F., L'Abbe, M.R., Cockell, K.A., Gibson, R.S. eds. p.
1-5.Ottawa, Canada, NRC Research Press. 
8. Reilly, C. 1996. Selenium in food and health. London, Blackie Academic and
Professional.
9. Anikina, L.V. 1992. Selenium-deficient cardiomyopathy (Keshan disease). In: Fifth
International Symposium on Selenium in Biology and Medicine. Burk, R.F. ed.
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN p 122.
10. Brennan, M.F. & Horwitz, G.D.  1984. Total parenteral nutrition in surgical patients.
Advances in Surgery, 17: 1-7.
11. van RiJ., A.M., Thompson, D., McKenzie, J.M. & Robinson, M.F. 1979. Selenium
deficiency in total parenteral nutrition. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 32: 2076-2085.
12. Rossipal, E. & Tiran, B. 1995. Selenium and glutathione peroxidase levels in healthy
infants and children in Austria and the influence of nutrition regimens on these levels.
Nutrition, 11 (5 suppl): 573-575.
13. Lombeck, I., Kasperek, K., Bonnermann, B. et al. 1975. Selenium content of human
milk, cows milk and cows milk infant formulas. Eur. J. Pediatr., 139-145.
14. Okada, A., Takagi, Y., Nezu, R., Sando, K. & Shenkin, A. 1995. Trace element
metabolism in parenteral and enteral nutrition. Nutrition,  11; 106-113.
15. Collip, P.J. & Chen, S.Y. 1981. Cardiomyopathy and selenium deficiency in a two year
old girl. N. Engl. J. Med.,  304: 1304-1305.
16. Lombeck, I., Ebert, K.H., Kasparek, K. et al. 1984. Selenium intake of infants and
young children, healthy children and dietetically treated patients with phenylketonnria.
Eur.  J. Pediatr., 143: 91-102.
17. Levander, O.A. & Beck, M.A. 1997. Interacting nutritional and infectious ecologies of
Keshan Disease. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 56: 5-21.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
251
18. Yang, G-Q., Zhu, L-Z., Liu, S-J., Gu, L-Z., Qian, P-C., Huang, J-H. & Lu, M-D.
1984. Human selenium requirements in China. In: Selenium in Biology and Medicine.
Combs, G.R., Spallholz, J.E., Levander, O.A., Oldfield, J.E. eds. p.589-607. New York,
AVI Van Nostrand. 
19. Johnson, C.C., Ge, X., Green, K.A. & Liu, X. 1996. Studies of selenium distribution in
soil, grain, drinking water and human hair samples from the Keshan Disease belt of
Zhangjiakou district, Henei Province, China. Technical Report WC/96/52. Nottingham,
UK, Overseas Geology Series, British Geological Survey. 
20. Li, J-Y., Ren, S-X., Cheng, D-Z., Wan, H-J., Liang, S-T., Zhang, F-J. & Gao, F-M.
1984. Distribution of selenium in the microenvironment related to Kaschin-Beck disease.
In: Selenium in Biology and Medicine. Combs, G.F., Spallholz, J.E., Levander, O.E.,
Oldfield, J.E. eds. p.911-925. New York, AVI Van Nostrand. 
21. Beck, M.A. 1998. The influence of antioxidant nutrients on viral infection. Nutr. Revs.,
56: S140-S146.
22. Baum, M.K. &  Shor-Posner, G. 1998. Micronutrient status in relationship to mortality
in HIV-1. Nutr. Revs., 56: S135-S139.
23. Baum, M.K., Shor-Posner, G., Lai, S.H., Zhang, G.Y., Fletcher, M.A., Sanberlich, H.
& Page, J.B. 1997. High risk of HIV-related mortality is associated with selenium
deficiency. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. Hum. Retrovirol., 15: 370-374.
24. Cirelli, A., Ciardi, M. & DeSimone, C. 1991. Serum selenium concentration and disease
progress in patients with HIV infection. Clin. Biochem., 24: 211-214.
25. Dworkin, B.M. 1994. Selenium deficiency in HIV infection and the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Chem. Bio. Interact., 91: 181-186.
26. Taylor, E.W., Nadimpalli, R.G. & Ramanthan, C.S. 1997. Genomic structures of viral
agents in relation to the synthesis of selenoproteins. Biol. Trace Elem. Res.,  56: 63-91.
27. Zazzo, J.F., Chalas, A. & LaFont. 1988. Is monobstructive cardiomyopathy in AIDS a
selenium deficiency-related disease. J. Parenteral Enteral Nutr., 12: 537-538.
28. Kavanaugh-McHugh, A.L., Ruff, A. & Pearlman, A. 1991. Selenium deficiency and
cardiomyopathy in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. J. Parenteral Enteral Nutr.,
15: 347-349.
29. Ramanathan, C.S. & Taylor, E.W. 1997. Computational genomic analysis of
Hemorrhagic viruses; viral selenoproteins as a potential factors in pathogenesis. Biol.
Trace Elem. Res., 56: 93-106.
30. Serfass, R.E. & Ganther, H.E. 1975. Defective microbial activity in glutathione
peroxidase deficient neutrophils of selenium deficient rats. Nature, 225: 640-641.
31. Boyne, R. & Arthur, J.R. 1986. The response of selenium deficient mice to Candida
albicans infection. J. Nutr., 116: 816-822.
32. Ip, C. & Sinha, D.K. 1981. Enhancement of mammary tumorigenesis by dietary selenium
deficiency in rats with a high polyunsaturated fat intake. Cancer Res., 41: 31-34.
33. Levander, O.A. 1987. A global view of human selenium nutrition. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 7:
227-250.
34. Birt, D.F., Pour, P.M. & Pelling, J.C. 1989. The influence of dietary selenium on colon,
pancreas, and skin tumorigenesis. In: Wendel A., ed. Selenium in biology and medicine. p.
297-304. Berlin, Springer-Verlag. 
35. Arthur, J.R., Nicol, F. & Beckett, G.J. 1993. Selenium deficiency thyroid hormone
metabolism and thyroid hormone deiodinases. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., Supplement, 57:
236S-239S.
252
Chapter 15: Selenium
36. Corrilain, B., Contempre, B., Longombe, A.O., Goyens, P., Gervy-Decoster, C.,
Lamy, F., Vanderpas, J.B. & Dumont, J.E. 1993. Selenium and the thyroid: how the
relationship was established. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., Supplement 57: 244S-248S.
37. Olivieri, O., Girelli, D., Stanzial, A.M., Rossi, L., Bassi, A. & Corrocher, R. 1996.
Selenium, zinc and thyroid hormones in healthy subjects. Low T3/T4 ratio in the elderly is
related to impaired selenium status. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 51: 31-41.
38. MacPherson, A., Barclay, M.N.J., Scotts, R. & Yates, R.W.S. 1997. Loss of Canadian
wheat imports lowers selenium intake and status of the Scottish population. In: Trace
Elements in Man and Animals -Proceedings of 9th International Symposium on Trace
Elements in Man and Animals. Fischer, P.W.F., L'Abbe, M.R., Cockell, K.A., Gibson,
R.S. p. 203-205. eds. Ottawa, Canada, NRC Research Press.
39. Vanderpas, J.B., Contempre, B., Duale, N.L. & Deckx, H. 1993. Selenium deficiency
mitigates hypothyroxinimia in iodine deficient subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 57 Suppl:
271S-275S.
40. Contempre, B., Le Moine, O., Dumont, J.E., Denef, J-F. & Many, M.C. 1996.
Selenium deficiency and thyroid fibrosis. A key role for macrophages and TGF-á. Mol.
Cell. Enyzmol., 124: 7-15.
41. Ma, T., Guo, J. & Wang, F. 1993. The epidemiology of iodine deficiency diseases in
China. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., Supplement, 57: 264S-266S.
42. Contempre, B., Many, M.C., Duale, G.L., Denef, J.F. & Dumont, J.E. 1996. Selenium
and iodine in thyroid function: the combined deficiency in the etiology of the involution
of the thyroid leading to myxoedematous cretinism. In: Thyroid and Trace Elments. 6th
Thyroid Symposium. p. 35-39. Eds. Browerman, L.E., Kohsle, J., Eber, O., Langsteger,
W. Graj-Eggenberg: Barmhersige Brudes. 
43. Mahalingam, T.R., Vijayalakshni, S., Krishna, & Prabhu, R. 1997. Studies on some
trace and minor elements in blood. A survey of the Kalpakkan (India) population. Part III:
Studies on dietary intake and its correlation to blood levels. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 57:
223-238.
44. Levander, O.A. 1987. A global view of human selenium nutrition. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 7:
227-250.
45. Varo, P. & Koivistoinen, P. 1980. Mineral element composition of Finnish foods. XII
General discussion and nutritional evaluation. Acta Agric. Scand., Supplement No. 22;
165-171.
46. MAFF. 1997.  UK Dietary Intake of Selenium. MAFF Food Surveillance Information
Sheet: No. 126. London, MAFF/HMSO.
47. World Health Organization. 1998. Complementary Feeding of Young Children in
Developing Countries \\WHO/NUT/98.1. Geneva, WHO.
48. Robberecht, H., Benemariya, H. & Dellstra, H. 1995. Daily dietary intake of copper,
zinc and selenium of exclusively breast fed infants of middle-class women in Burundi,
Africa. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 49: 151-159.
49. Williams, M.M.F. 1983. Selenium and glutathione peroxidase in mature human milk.
Proceedings of the University of Otago Medical School, Dunedin, 61: 20-21.
50. World Health Organisation/International Atomic Energy Agency. 1989. Minor and
Trace Elements in Milk. Geneva, WHO.
51. Kumpulainen, J., Vuori, E. & Kuitunen, P. 1983. Longetudinal study on the dietary
selenium intake of exclusively breast fed infants and their mothers in Finland. Int. J. Vit.
Nutr. Res., 53: 420-426.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
253
52. Millar, K.R. & Sheppard, A.D. 1972. α-Tocopherol and selenium levels in human and
cow's milk. NZ J. Sci., 15: 3-15.
53. Sumar, S., Kondza, B. & Foster, L.H. 1997. Selenium levels in infant formulae and
breast milk from the United Kingdom: a study of estimated intakes. In: Trace Elements in
Man and Animals - 9. Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on Trace
Elements in Man and Animals. Fischer, P.W.F., L'Abbe, K.A., Cockell, K.A. Gibson, R.S.
p.282-283.Ottawa, Canada,  NRC Research Press. 
54. Cumming, F.J., Fardy, J.J. & Woodward, D.R. 1992. Selenium and human lactation in
Australia: milk and blood selenium levels in lactating women and selenium intake of their
breast-fed infants. Acta Paediatrica, 81: 1058-1061.
55. Levander, O.A., Moser, P.B. & Morris, V.C. 1987. Dietary selenium intake and
selenium concentrations of plasma, erythrocytes, and breast milk in pregnant and
postpartum lactating and nonlactating women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 46: 694-698.
56. Shearer, T.R. & Hadjimarkos, D.M. 1975. Geographic distribution of selenium in
human milk. Arch. Environ. Health, 30: 230-233.
57. Lombeck, I., Kasparek, & Bonnerman, B. 1975. Selenium content of human milk,
cow's milk and cow's milk infant formulaes. Eur. J. Paediatr.. 129: 139-145.
58. Iyengar, V. & Wooittiez, J. 1988. Trace elements in human clinical specimens:
evaluation of literature to identify reference values. Clin. Chem., 34: 474-481.
59. Darlow, B.A., Inder, T.E., Sluis, K.B., Nuthall, G. et al. 1995. Selenium status of New
Zealand infants fed either a selenium supplemented or a standard formula. J. Paediatr.
Child. Health, 31: 339-344.
60. Smith, A., Picciano, M.F. & Milner, J.A. 1982. Selenium intakes and status of human
milk formula fed infants. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 35: 521-526.
61. Lonnerdal, B. 1997. Effects of milk and milk components on calcium, magnesium, and
trace element absorption during infancy. Physiol. Revs., 77: 643-669.
62. Yang, G., Wang, S., Zhou, R. & Sun, S. 1983. Endemic sleenium intoxication of
Humans in China. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37: 872-881.
63. Luo, X.M., Yang, C.L., Wei, H.J., Liu, X. & Qixo, C.H. 1984. Selenium intake and
metabolic balance in 10 men consuming self-selected diets in a selenium-deficient area of
Hebei Provence, PR China. FASEB J., 43: Abstr. 1097.
64. Parr, R.M., Crawley, H., Aldulla, M., Iyengar, G.V. & Kumpulainen, J. 1992. Human
dietary itnakes of trace elements: A global literature survey mainly for the period 1970-
1991. I Data listings and sources of information. NAHRES 12, Vienna, International
Atomic Energy Agency. 
65. Robinson, M.T. & Thomason, C.D. 1984. Status of the food supply and residents of
New Zealand. In: Combs GF (ed) Selenium in Biology and Medicine. p. 631-644.  New
York, AVI Van Nostrand.
66. Abdulla, M.A., Behbehani, A. & Dashti, H. 1989. Dietary intake and bio-availability of
trace elements. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 21: 173-178.
67. Koivistoinen, P. & Varo, P. 1987. Selenium in Finnish food. In: Selenium in Biology and
Medicine. Cambs. J.F., Spallholz, J.E., Lavander, O.A., p. 645-651. New York, Oldfield.
Van Nostrand.
68. Mutanen, M. 1985. Comparison of chemical analysis and calculation emthod in
estimating selenium content of Finnish diets. Nutr. Res., 5: 693-697.
254
Chapter 15: Selenium
69. Mutanen, M. 1984. Dietary intake and sources of selenium in young Finnish women.
Hum. Nutr: Appl. Nutr., 38A: 265-269.
70. Kadrabova, J., Madaric, A. & Ginter, E. 1998. Determination of the daily selenium
intake in Slovakia. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 61: 277-286.
71. Oster, O. & Prellwitz, W. 1989. The daily dietary selenium intake of West German
adults. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 20: 1-14.
72. Simonoff, M. & Simonoff, G. 1991. Le Selenium et la Vie. Paris, Masson.
73. Levander, O.A. & Morris, V.C. 1984. Dietary selenium levels needed to maintain
balance in North American adults consuming self-selected diets. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 39:
809-815.
74. Thomson, J.N., Erdody, P. & Smith, D.C. 1975. Selenium in Canadian Foods and diets.
J. Nutr., 105: 274-279.
75. Bratter, P, Bratter, N. & Gwlik, D. 1993. Selenium in Human monitors related to the
regional dietary intake levels in Venezuela. J. Trace Elem. Electrolyte Health Dis., 7:
111-112.
76. Alfthan, G. & Neve, J. 1996. Reference values for serum selenium in various areas
evaluated according to the TRACY protocol. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 10: 77-87.
77. Diplock, A.T., Contempre, B., Dumont, J., Bebe, N. & Vanderpas, J. 1997. Interaction
of selenium and iodine deficiency diseases. In: Trace Elements in Man and Animals - 9.
Proceedings of the ninth International Symposium on Trace Elements in Man and
Animals. p. 63-68. Fischer, P.W.F. L'Abbe, M.R., Cockell, K.A., Gibson, R.S. Ottawa,
ON, NRC Research Press. 
78. Diplock, A.T. 1993. Indexes of selenium status in Human populations. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
Supplement 57: 256S-258S.
79. Versieck, J. & Cornelis, R. 1989. Trace elements in Human plasma or serum. Boca
Raton, CRC Press.
80. WHO. 1987. Selenium, Geneva, World Health Organization. (Environmental Health
Criteria, 58).
81. Patterson, B.H., Zech, L.A., Swanson, C.A. & Levander, O.A. 1993. Kinetic modelling
of selenium in Humans using stable isotope tracers. J. Trace Elem. Electrolyte Health Dis.
7: 117-120.
82. Mutanen, M. Bio-availability of selenium. Ann. Clin. Res.,1986; 18: 48-54.
83. Levander, O.A. 1983.Bio-availability of selenium to Finnish men as assessed by platelet
glutathione peroxidase activity and other blood parameters. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37:
887-897.
84. Levander, O.A. 1988. The global selenium agenda. In: Trace Elements in man and
animals - 6. Proceeding of the 6th International Symposium on Trace Elements in Man
and Animals. Hurley, L.S., Keen, C.L., Lonnerdal, B., Rucker, R.B. eds. New York
Plenum Press Inc.
85. Gu, Q-P., Xia, Y-M., Ha, P-C., Butler, J.A. & Whanger, P.D. 1998.Distribution of
selenium between plasma fractions in guinea pigs and Humans with various intakes of
selenium. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 12: 8-15.
86. WHO/FAO/IAEA. 1996. Trace elements in Human nutrition and health. Geneva. World
Health Organization.
87. National Research Council, Food and Nutirtion Board. 1988. Recommended Dietary
Allowances, 10 edition. Washington, D.C. US National Academy Press.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements 
255
88. Lombeck, I., Kaspereck, K., Harbisch, H.D., Feinendegen, L.E. &  Bremer, H.J.
1997. The selenium status of healthy children. I. Serum selenium concentration at
different ages; activity of glutathione peroxidase of erythrocytes at different ages;
selenium content of food of infants. Eur. J. Paediatr., 125: 81-88.
89. Levander, O.A. 19893 Upper limit of selenium in infant formulas. J. Nutr., 119:
1869-1871.
90. Scientific Committee for Food. 1993. Nutrient and Energy Intakes for the European
Community.  Report of the Scientific Committee for Food, Thirty First Series.  Office for
Official Publications of the European Communities, Brussels. 
91. Department of Health.  1991. Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrient
Intakes for the United Kingdom.  Report on Health and Social Subjects No.41.London,
HMSO.
92. Netherlands Food and Nutrition Council. 1989. Recommended Dietary Allowances.
The Netherlands. The Hague.
93. Smith, M.I., Franke, K.W. & Westfall, B.B. 1936. The selenium problem in relation to
publish health. US Public Health Report., 51: 1496-1505.
94. Smith, M.I. & Westfall, B.B. 1937. Further field studies on the selenium problem in
relation to public health. US Public Health Report, 52: 1375-1384.
95. Yang, G., Wang, S., Zhou, R. & Sun, S. 1983. Endemic selenium intoxication of
Humans in China. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 37: 872-881.
96. Hadjimarkos, D.M. 1973. Selenium in relation to dental caries. Food Cosmetic Toxicol.,
11: 1083-1095.
97. Hadjimarkos, D.M., Storveik, C.A. & Renmert, L.T. 1952. Selenium and dental casies.
An investigation among school children of Oregon. J. Paediatr., 40: 451-455. 
98. National Research Council. 1980.  Mineral Tolerance of Domestic Animals.
Commission on Natural Resources., Washinton, D.C. National Academy of Sciences.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
257
Role of zinc in human metabolic processes
Z
inc is present in all body tissues and fluids. The total body zinc content has been
estimated to be 30 mmol (2 g). Skeletal muscle accounts for approximately 60 percent
of the total body content and bone mass, with a zinc concentration of 1.5–3 µmol/g
(100-200 µg/g), for approximately 30 percent. Zinc concentration of lean body mass is
approximately 0.46 µmol/g (30 µg/g). Plasma zinc has a rapid turnover rate and it represents
only about 0.l percent of total body zinc content. This level appears to be under close
homeostatic control. High concentrations of zinc are found in the choroid of the eye 4.2
µmol/g (274 µg/g) and in prostatic fluids 4.6-7.7 mmol/l (300-500 mg/l) (1).
Zinc is an essential component of a large number (>300) of enzymes participating in
the synthesis and degradation of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids as well as in
the metabolism of other micronutrients. Zinc stabilises the molecular structure of cellular
components and membranes and contributes in this way to the maintenance of cell and organ
integrity. Furthermore, zinc has an essential role in polynucleotide transcription and thus in
the process of genetic expression. Its involvement in such fundamental activities probably
accounts for the essentiality of zinc for all life forms.
Zinc plays a central role in the immune system, affecting a number of aspects of
cellular and Humoral immunity (2). The role of zinc in immunity was reviewed extensively
by Shanglar et al. (2).
The clinical features of severe zinc deficiency in humans are growth retardation,
delayed sexual and bone maturation, skin lesions, diarrhoea, alopecia, impaired appetite,
increased susceptibility to infections mediated via defects in the immune system, and the
appearance of behavioural changes (1). The effects of marginal or mild zinc deficiency are
less clear. A reduced growth rate and impairments of immune defence are so far the only
clearly demonstrated signs of mild zinc deficiency in humans. Other effects, such as impaired
taste and wound healing, which have been claimed to result from a low zinc intake, are less
consistently observed.
Zinc metabolism and homeostasis 
Zinc absorption is concentration dependent and occurs throughout the small intestine. Under
normal physiologic conditions, transport processes of uptake are not saturated. Zinc
administered in aqueous solutions to fasting subjects is absorbed efficiently (60–70 percent),
whereas absorption from solid diets is less efficient and varies depending on zinc content and
diet composition (3).
Zinc is lost from the body through the kidneys, skin, and intestine. The endogenous
intestinal losses can vary from 7 µmol/day (0.5 mg/day) to more than 45 µmol/day (3
mg/day), depending on zinc intake (4). Urinary and skin losses are of the order of 7-10
µmol/day (0.5–0.7 mg/day) each and depend less on normal variations in zinc intake (4).
Starvation and muscle catabolism increase zinc losses in urine. Strenuous exercise and
elevated ambient temperatures could lead to losses by perspiration.
Chapter 16
Zinc
258
Chapter 16: Zinc
The body has no zinc stores in the conventional sense. In conditions of bone
resorption and tissue catabolism, zinc is released and may be re-utilised to some extent.
Human experimental studies with low-zinc diets 2.6–3.6 mg/day (40-55 µmol/day) have
shown that circulating zinc levels and activities of zinc-containing enzymes can be maintained
within normal range over several months (5, 6), which highlights the efficiency of the zinc
homeostasis mechanism. Controlled depletion-repletion studies in humans have shown that
changes in the endogenous excretion of zinc through the kidneys, intestine, and skin and
changes in absorptive efficiency are how body zinc content is maintained (7-10). The
underlying mechanisms are poorly understood.
Sensitive indexes for assessing zinc status are unknown at present. Static indexes, such
as zinc concentration in plasma, blood cells, and hair, and urinary zinc excretion are decreased
in severe zinc deficiency. A number of conditions that are unrelated to zinc status can affect
all these indexes, especially zinc plasma levels. Infection, stress situations such as fever, food
intake, and pregnancy lower plasma zinc concentrations whereas, for example, long-term
fasting increases it (11). However, on a population basis, reduced plasma zinc concentrations
seem to be a marker for zinc-responsive growth reductions (12, 13). Experimental zinc
depletion studies suggest that changes in immune response occur before reductions in plasma
zinc concentrations are apparent (14). So far, it has not been possible to identify zinc-
dependent enzymes which could serve as early markers for zinc status.
A number of functional indexes of zinc status have been suggested, for example,
wound healing, taste acuity, and dark adaptation (11). Changes in these functions are,
however, not specific to zinc and these indexes have so far not been proven useful for
identifying marginal zinc deficiency in humans.
The introduction of stable isotope techniques in zinc research (15) has created
possibilities for evaluating the relationship between diet and zinc status and is likely to lead to
a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the homeostatic regulations of zinc.
Estimations of turnover rates of administered isotopes in plasma or urine have revealed the
existence of a relatively small rapidly exchangeable body pool of zinc of about 1.5-3 mmol
(100-200 mg) (16-19). The size of the pool seems to be correlated to habitual dietary intake
and it is reduced in controlled depletion studies (18). The exchangeable zinc pool was also
found to be correlated to endogenous faecal excretion of zinc (19) and to total daily
absorption of zinc. These data suggest that the size of the exchangeable pool depends on
recently absorbed zinc and that a larger exchangeable pool results in larger endogenous
excretion. Changes in endogenous intestinal excretion of zinc seem to be more important than
changes in absorptive efficiency for maintenance of zinc homeostasis (19).
Dietary sources and availability of zinc 
Lean red meat, whole-grain cereals, pulses, and legumes provide the highest concentrations of
zinc 25-50 mg/kg (380-760 µmol/kg) raw weight. Processed cereals with low extraction rates,
polished rice, and lean meat or meat with high fat content have a moderate zinc content 10-25
mg/kg (150-380 µmol/kg). Fish, roots and tubers, green leafy vegetables, and fruits are only
modest sources of zinc <10 mg/kg (<150 µmol/kg) (20). Separated fats and oils, sugar, and
alcohol have a very low zinc content.
The utilisation of zinc depends on the overall composition of the diet. Experimental
studies have identified a number of dietary factors as potential promoters or antagonists of
zinc absorption (21). Soluble low-molecular-weight organic substances, such as amino and
hydroxy acids, facilitate zinc absorption. In contrast, organic compounds forming stable and
poorly soluble complexes with zinc can impair absorption. In addition, competitive
interactions between zinc and other ions with similar physicochemical properties can affect
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
259
the uptake and intestinal absorption of zinc. The risk for competitive interactions seems
mainly to be related to high doses in the form of supplements or in aqueous solutions.
However, at levels present in food and at realistic fortification levels, zinc absorption appears
not to be affected, for example, by iron and copper (21).
Isotope studies with human subjects have identified two factors which together with
the total zinc content of the diet are major determinants of absorption and utilisation of dietary
zinc. The first is the content of inositol hexaphosphate (phytate) and the second is the level
and source of dietary protein. Phytates are present in whole-grain cereals and legumes and in
smaller amounts in other vegetables. They have a strong potential for binding divalent cations
and their depressive effect on zinc absorption has been demonstrated in humans (21). The
molar ratio between phytates and zinc in meals or diets is a useful indicator of the effect of
phytates in depressing zinc absorption. At molar ratios above the range of 6–10, zinc
absorption starts to decline; at ratios above 15 absorption is typically less than 15 percent
(20). The effect of phytate is, however, modified by the source and amount of dietary proteins
consumed. Animal proteins improve zinc absorption from a phytate-containing diet. Zinc
absorption from some legume-based diets is comparable with that from animal-protein-based
diets despite a higher phytate content in the former. High dietary calcium potentiated the
antagonistic effects of phytates on zinc absorption in experimental studies. The results from
human studies are less consistent and any effects seem to depend on the source of calcium and
the composition of the diet (22).
Some examples of recently published absorption studies illustrate the effect of zinc
content and diet composition on fractional zinc absorption (Table 53) (19, 23- 25). The results
from the total diet studies, where all main meals of a day’s intake have been extrinsically
labelled, show a remarkable consistency in fractional absorption despite relatively large
variations in meal composition and zinc content. Thus, approximately twice as much zinc was
absorbed from a non-vegetarian or high-meat diet (24, 25) than from a diet in rural China
based on rice and wheat flour (20). Data are lacking on zinc absorption from typical diets of
developing countries, which usually have a high phytate content.
The availability of zinc from the diet can be improved by reductions in the phytate
content and inclusion of animal protein sources. Lower extraction rates of cereal grains will
result in lower phytate content but at the same time the zinc content is reduced, so that the net
effect on zinc supply is limited. The phytate content can be reduced by activating the phytase
present in most phytate-containing foods or through the addition of microbial or fungal
phytases. Phytases hydrolyse the phytate to lower inositol phosphates, resulting in an
improved zinc absorption (26, 27). The activity of phytases in tropical cereals such as maize
and sorghum is lower than that in wheat and rye (28). Germination of cereals and legumes
increases phytase activity and addition of some germinated flour to ungerminated maize or
sorghum followed by soaking at ambient temperature for 12–24 hours can reduce the phytate
content substantially (28). Additional reduction can be achieved by the fermentation of
porridge for weaning foods or doughs for bread making. Commercially available phytase
preparations could also be used but may not be economically accessible in many populations.
Populations at risk for zinc deficiency 
The central role of zinc in cell division, protein synthesis, and growth makes infants, children,
adolescents, and pregnant women especially at risk for an inadequate zinc intake.
Zinc-responsive stunting has been identified in several studies (29), and a more rapid body
weight gain in malnourished children supplemented with zinc was reported. Other studies
have failed to show a growth-promoting effect of zinc supplementation (13). A recent meta-
analysis of 25 intervention trials comprising 1834 children under 13 years of age, with a mean
duration of approximately 7 months and a mean dose of zinc of 14 mg/day (214 µmol/day),
260
Chapter 16: Zinc
showed a small but significant positive effect of zinc supplementation on height and weight
increases (13). The initial presence of stunting was significantly associated with an effect of
zinc supplementation on height, whereas initial low plasma zinc concentrations were
associated with a more pronounced effect on weight gain.
Results from zinc supplementation studies suggest that a low zinc status in children
not only affects growth but is also associated with an increased risk of severe infectious
diseases (30). Episodes of acute diarrhoea with shorter duration and less severity and
reductions in incidence of diarrhoea in zinc-supplemented groups have been reported. Other
studies indicate that the incidence of acute lower respiratory tract infections and malaria may
also be reduced by zinc supplementation. Prevention of sub-optimal zinc status and zinc
deficiency in children by an increased intake and availability of zinc could consequently have
a significant effect on child health in developing countries.
The role of maternal zinc status on pregnancy outcome is still unclear. Positive as well
as negative associations between plasma zinc concentration and foetal growth or labour and
delivery complications have been reported (31). Results of zinc supplementation studies also
remain inconclusive (31). Interpretation of plasma zinc concentrations in pregnancy is
complicated by the effect of hemodilution, and low plasma zinc levels may reflect other
metabolic disturbances (11). Zinc supplementation studies of pregnant women have been
performed mainly in relatively well-nourished populations, which may be one of the reasons
for the mixed results (31). A recent study in low-income American women with plasma zinc
concentrations below the mean at enrolment in prenatal care showed that a zinc intake of 25
mg/day resulted in greater infant birth weights and head circumferences and a reduction in
very low birth weights among non-obese women compared with the placebo group (12).
Table 53
Examples of fractional zinc absorption from total diets
Subject
characteristics
Diet/meal
characteristics
(ref.)
Young adults (n=8)
(22)
Young women
(n=10) (19)
High-fibre diet
Habitual diet
Lacto-ovo
vegetarian
Women
(20-42years)
(n=21) (24)
Non-vegetarian
Women
(20-42years) (n=21)
(24)
Low meat
Postmenopausal
women (n-14) (25)
High meat
a SD, standard deviation.
b Pooled SD=5.c Pooled SD=4.6.
Source: Adapted from FAO/WHO Trace Mineral Report(32)
measured by isotope techniques
Zinc
content
µmol (mg)
Isotope
technique
Radioisotopes
163 (10.7)
Stable isotopes
124 (8.1)
Radioisotopes
139 (9.1)
Radioisotopes
169 (11.1)
Radioisotopes
102 (6.7)
Radioisotopes
198 (13.0)
Phytate-
zinc
molar
Zinc
absorption,
%(x±SD)a
ratio
7
27±6
34±9
10
26 b
14
33 b
5
30 c
28 c
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
261
Zinc requirements 
The lack of specific and sensitive indexes for zinc status limits the possibilities for evaluating
zinc requirements from epidemiologic observations. In the FAO/IAEA/WHO 1996 report
(32), zinc requirements were estimated by using the factorial technique (i.e., by adding the
requirements for tissue growth, maintenance, metabolism, and endogenous losses).
Experimental zinc repletion studies with low zinc intakes have clearly shown that the body
has a pronounced ability to adapt to different levels of zinc intakes by changing the
endogenous zinc losses through the kidneys, intestine, and skin (5-9,33). The normative
requirement for absorbed zinc was defined as the obligatory loss during the early phase of
zinc depletion before adaptive reductions in excretion take place and was set at 1.4 mg/day for
men and 1.0 mg/day for women. To estimate the normative maintenance requirements for
other age groups, the respective basal metabolic rates were used for extrapolation. In growing
individuals the rate of accretion and zinc content of newly formed tissues were used to obtain
the data required for tissue growth. Similarly, the retention of zinc during pregnancy and the
zinc concentration in milk at different stages of lactation were used to estimate the
physiologic requirements in pregnancy and lactation (32).
The translation of these estimates of absorbed zinc to requirements for dietary zinc
involves several considerations. First, the nature of the diet (i.e., its content of promoters and
inhibitors of zinc absorption) determines the fraction of the dietary zinc that is potentially
absorbable. Second, the efficiency of absorption of potentially available zinc is inversely
related to the content of zinc in the diet. The review of available data from experimental zinc
absorption studies of single meals or total diets resulted in a division of diets into three
categories – high, moderate, and low zinc bio-availability – as detailed in Table 54 (32). It
was then discovered that the relationship between efficiency of absorption and zinc content
differed for these diets (32). Algorithms were developed (32) and applied to the estimates of
requirements for absorbed zinc to achieve a set of figures for the average individual dietary
zinc requirements (Table 55). The fractional absorption figures applied for the three diet
categories were 50 percent, 30 percent, and 15 percent, respectively. From these estimates and
from the evaluation of data from dietary intake studies, mean population intakes were
identified which were deemed sufficient to ensure a low prevalence of individuals at risk of
inadequate zinc intake (32).
Infants, children, and adolescents
Endogenous losses of zinc in human-milk-fed infants were assumed to be 20 µg/kg/day
(0.31µmol/kg/day) whereas 40 µg/kg/day (0.6 µmol/kg/day) was assumed for infants fed
formula or weaning foods (32). For other age groups an average loss of 0.002 µmol/basal kJ
(0.57 µg/basal kcal) was derived from the estimates in adults. Estimated zinc increases for
infant growth were set at 120 and 140 µg/kg/day (1.83–2.14 µmol/kg/day) for female and
male infants, respectively, for the first 3 months (32). These values decrease to 33 µg/kg/day
(0.50 µmol/kg/day) for ages 6–12 months. For ages 1–10 years the requirements for growth
were based on the assumption that new tissue contains 30 µg/g (0.46 µmol zinc/g) (32). For
adolescent growth, a zinc content of 23 µg/g (0.35 µmol/g) increase in body weight was
assumed. Pubertal growth spurts increase physiologic zinc requirements substantially. Growth
of adolescent males corresponds to an increase in body zinc requirement of about 0.5 mg/day
(7.6 µmol/day) (32).
262
Chapter 16: Zinc
Pregnancy
The total amount of zinc retained during pregnancy has been estimated to be 1.5 mmol (100
mg) (34). During the third trimester the physiologic requirement of zinc is approximately
twice as high as that in women who are not pregnant (32).
Lactation
Zinc concentrations in human milk are high in early lactation, 2-3 mg/l (31-46 µmol/l) in the
first month, and fall to 0.9 mg/l (14 µmol/l) after 3 months (35). From data on maternal milk
volume and zinc content, it was estimated that the daily output of zinc in milk during the first
3 months of lactation could amount to 1.4 mg/day (21.4 µmol/l), which would theoretically
triple the physiologic zinc requirements in lactating women compared with non-lactating,
non-pregnant women. In setting the estimated requirements for early lactation it was assumed
that part of this requirement was covered by postnatal involution of the uterus and from
skeletal resorption (32).
Elderly
Requirements for the elderly are estimated to be the same as those for other adults. A lower
absorptive efficiency has been reported in the elderly, which could justify a higher dietary
requirement. On the other hand, endogenous losses seem to be lower in the elderly. Because
of the suggested role of zinc in infectious diseases, an optimal zinc status in the elderly could
have a significant public health effect and is an area of zinc metabolism requiring further
research.
Inter-individual variations in zinc requirements and recommended nutrient
intakes 
The studies (6-10) used to estimate the average physiologic requirements with the factorial
technique have considered a relatively small number of subjects and do not allow any
estimate of inter-individual variations in obligatory losses of zinc at different intakes. Because
zinc requirements are related to tissue turnover rate and growth, it is reasonable to assume that
variations in physiologic zinc requirements are of the same magnitude as variations in protein
requirements (36) and that the same figure (12.5 percent) for the inter-individual coefficient
of variation (CV) could be adopted. However, the estimates of dietary zinc requirements
involve an estimate of absorption. Consequently, variations in absorptive efficiency, not
relevant in relation to estimates of protein requirements, may have to be taken into account in
the estimates of the total inter-individual variation in zinc requirements. Systematic studies of
the inter-individual variations in zinc absorption under different conditions are few. In small
groups of healthy well-nourished subjects, the reported variations in zinc absorption from a
defined meal or diet are of the order of 20–40 percent and seem to be independent of age, sex,
or diet characteristics. How much these variations, besides being attributable to methodologic
imprecision, reflect variations in physiologic requirement, effects of preceding zinc intake,
etc. is not known. From the available data from zinc absorption studies (19, 20, 23-27) it is
tentatively suggested that the variation in dietary zinc requirements, which covers variation in
requirement for absorbed zinc (i.e., variations in metabolism and turnover rate of zinc) and
variation in absorptive efficiency, corresponds to a CV of 25 percent. The recommended
nutrient intakes derived from the estimates of average individual dietary requirements
(Table 55) with the addition of 50 percent (2 standard deviations) are given in Table 56.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
263
Table 54
Criteria for categorising diets according to the potential availability of their zinc
Nominal category
Principal dietary characteristics
High availability
Refined diets low in cereal fibre, low in phytic acid content, and
with phytate-zinc (molar) ratio <5; adequate protein content
principally from non-vegetable sources, such as meats, fish.
Includes semisynthetic formula diets based on animal protein.
Moderate availability
Mixed diets containing animal or fish protein.
Lacto-ovo, ovovegetarian, or vegan diets not based primarily on
unrefined cereal grains or high-extraction-rate flours.
Phytate-zinc molar ration of total diet within the range 5–15 or not
exceeding 10 if more than 50% of the energy intake is accounted
for by unfermented, unrefined cereal grains and flours whereas the
diet is fortified with inorganic calcium salts (>1 g Ca2+/ day).
Availability of zinc improves when the diet includes animal or
protein sources or milks.
Low availability
Diets high in unrefined, unfermented, and ungerminated cereal
grain,a especially when fortified with inorganic calcium salts and
when intake of animal protein is negligible.
Phytate-zinc molar ration of total diet exceeds 15.b
High-phytate soya-protein products constitute the primary protein
source.
Diets in which, singly or collectively, approximately 50% of the
energy intake is accounted for by the following high-phytate
foods: high-extraction-rate (90% +) wheat, rice, maize, grains and
flours, oatmeal, and millet; chapatti flours and tanok; and
sorghum, cowpeas, pigeon peas, grams, kidney beans, blackeye
beans, and groundnut flours.
High intakes of inorganic calcium salts (>1 g Ca2+/ day), either as
supplements or as adventitious contaminants (e.g., from
calcareous geophagia), potentiate the inhibitory effects; low
intakes of animal protein exacerbate these effects.
aGermination of such grains or fermentation (e.g., leavening) of many flours can reduce antagonistic potency; the
diet should then be classified as moderate availability.
bVegetable diets with phytate-zinc ratios exceeding 30 are not unknown; for such diets, an assumption of 10
percent availability of zinc or less may be justified, especially if the intake of protein is low, calcium salts is
excessive, or both (e.g., calcium salts providing >1.5 g Ca2+/day).
264
Chapter 16: Zinc
Table 55
Average individual normative requirements for zinc (µg/kg body weight/day)
from diets differing in zinc bio-availabilitya
Age range
High bio-
availabilityb
Moderate bio-
years
µg/kg body weight/day
Infants and
Children
   Females, 0–0.25
175e
457f
1067g
Males, 0–0.25
200e
514f
1200g
0.25–0.5
79e
204f
477g
0.5–1
66e
—
—
   0.5–1
186
311
621
   1–3
138
230
459
   3-6
114
190
380
   6-10
90
149
299
Adolescents
   Females, 10–12
68
113
227
   Males, 10–12
80
133
267
   Females, 12–15
64
107
215
   Males, 12–15
76
126
253
   Females, 15–18
56
93
187
   Males, 15–18
61
102
205
Adults
   Females, 18–60+
36
59
119
   Males, 18–60+
43
72
144
  Source: Adapted from FAO/IAEA/WHO (32).
a For information on diets, see Table 54
b Assumed bio-availability of dietary zinc 50 percent.
c Assumed bio-availability of dietary zinc 30 percent.
d Assumed bio-availability of dietary zinc 15 percent.
eApplicable exclusively to infants fed maternal milk alone for which the bio-availability of zinc is with no
allowance for storage.
f Applicable to infants partly human-milk-fed or fed whey-adjusted cow milk formula or milk plus low-phytate
solids. No allowance for storage.
g Applicable to infants receiving phytate-rich vegetable-protein-based infant formula with or without
whole-grain cereals. No allowance for storage.
Upper limits of zinc intake 
Only a few occurrences of acute zinc poisoning have been reported. The toxicity signs are
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, and lethargy and have been observed after ingestion of 4-8
g (60-120 mmol) zinc. Long-term zinc intakes higher than the requirements could, however,
interact with the metabolism of other trace elements. Copper seems to be especially sensitive
to high zinc doses. A zinc intake of 50 mg/day (760 µmol) affects copper status indexes, such
as CuZn-superoxide dismutase in erythrocytes (37, 38). Low copper and ceruloplasmin levels
and anaemia have been observed after higher zinc intakes 450-660 mg/day (6.9-10 mmol/day)
(39, 40). Changes in serum lipid pattern and in immune response have also been observed in
zinc supplementation studies (41, 42). Because copper also has a central role in immune
defence, these observations call for caution before large-scale zinc supplementation
programmes are undertaken. Any positive effects of zinc supplementation on growth or
availabilityc
Low bio-availabilityd
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
265
infectious diseases could be disguised or counterbalanced by negative effects on copper-
related functions.
The upper level of zinc intake for an adult man is set at 45 mg/day (690 µmol/day) and
extrapolated to other groups in relation to basal metabolic rate. For children this extrapolation
means an upper limit of intake of 23–28 mg/day (350–430 µmol/day), which is close to what
has been used in some of the zinc supplementation studies. Except for excessive intakes of
some types of seafood, such intakes are unlikely to be attained with most diets. Adventitious
zinc in water from contaminated wells and from galvanized cooking utensils could also lead
to high zinc intakes.
Table 56
Recommended nutrient intakes (RNIs) for dietary zinc (mg/day) to meet the
normative storage requirements from diets differing in zinc bio-availabilitya
Assumed
body
weight, kg
Low bio-
availability
Infants and children
Age group
0–6 months
6
1.1b
2.8c
6.6d
7–12 months
9
0.8b
–
–
7–12 months
9
2.5e
4.1
8.4
1–3 years
12
2.4
4.1
8.3
4–6 years
17
2.9
4.8
9.6
7–9 years
25
3.3
5.6
11.2
Adolescents
Females, 10–18 years,
47
4.3
7.2
14.4
Males, 10–18 years
49
5.1
8.6
17.1
Adults
Females, 19– 65 years
55
3.0
4.9
9.8
Males, 19–65 years
65
4.2
7.0
14.0
Females, 65+ years
55
3.0
4.9
9.8
Males, 65+ years
65
4.2
7.0
14.0
Pregnant Women
First trimester
–
3.4
5.5
11.0
 Second trimester
–
4.2
7.0
14.0
 Third trimester
–
6.0
10.0
20.0
Lactating women
0–3 months
–
5.8
9.5
19.0
 3–6 months
–
5.3
8.8
17.5
 6–12 months
–
4.3
7.2
14.4
aFor information on diets, see Table 54. Unless otherwise specified, the intra-individual variation of zinc
requirements is assumed to be 25 percent. Weight data interpolated from FAO/WHO, 1988 (36).
bHuman-milk-fed infants receiving maternal milk only; assumed coefficient of variation (CV) 12.5 percent; assumed
availability 80 percent.
cFormula-fed infants: moderate bio-availability for whey-adjusted milk formula and for infants partly human-milk-
fed or given low-phytate feeds supplemented with other liquid milks; assumed CV 12.5 percent.
dFormula-fed infants; low bio-availability applicable to phytate-rich vegetable-protein-based formula with or
without whole-grain cereals; CV 12.5 percent.
eNot applicable to infants consuming human milk only.
High bio-
availability
Moderate bio-
availability
266
Chapter 16: Zinc
Adequacy of zinc intakes in relation to requirement estimates
The risk for inadequate zinc intakes in children has been evaluated by using the
suggested estimates of zinc requirements (32) and by using data available on food
composition and dietary intake in different parts of the world (43). For this assessment it was
assumed that the distribution of zinc requirements is Gaussian with a CV of 15 percent and
that the correlation between intake and requirement is very low. Zinc absorption from diets in
Malawi, Kenya, Mexico, and Guatemala was estimated to be 15 percent based on the high
phytate-zinc molar ratio (37-42) in these diets, whereas an absorption of 30 percent was
assumed for diets in Ghana, Guatemala, Egypt, and Papua New Guinea. Fermented maize and
cassava products (kenkey, banku, and gari) in Ghana, yeast leavened wheat-based bread in
Egypt, and the use of sago with a low phytate content as the staple in the New Guinean diets
were assumed to result in a lower phytate-zinc molar ratio and a better availability. With this
approach 68–94 percent of the children were estimated to be at risk for zinc deficiency in
these populations, with the exception of Egypt where the estimate was 36 percent (43). The
average daily zinc intakes of these children were 3.7-6.9 mg (56-105 µmol). Most of the zinc
supplementation studies have not provided dietary intake data, which could be used to
identify the zinc intake critical for growth effects. In a recent study in Chile, positive effects
on height gain in boys after 14 months of zinc supplementation was noted (44). The intake in
the placebo group at the start was 6.3 ± 1.3 mg/day (96 ± 20 µmol/day) (n=49). Because only
15 percent of the zinc intake of the Chilean children was derived from flesh foods, availability
was assumed to be relatively low.
Krebs et al (45) observed no effect of zinc supplementation on human-milk zinc
content or on maternal status of a group of lactating women and judged their intake sufficient
to maintain adequate zinc status through 7 months or more of lactation. The mean zinc intake
of the non-supplemented women was 13.0 ± 3.4 mg/day (199 ± 52 µmol/day).
The efficient homeostatic mechanisms for maintaining body zinc content at low
intakes, which formed the basis for the estimates of physiologic requirements in the
FAO/IAEA/WHO 1996 report (32), as well as the presumed negative impact of a high-
phytate diet on zinc status, were confirmed in recent experimental studies (10, 44, 46, 47).
Reductions in urinary and faecal losses maintained normal plasma zinc concentrations over 5
weeks in 11 men with intakes of 2.45 mg zinc/day (37 µmol/day) or higher in a diet with a
presumably high availability (10). In a similar repletion-depletion study with 15 men, an
intake of 4 mg/day (61 µmol/day) from a diet with a molar phytate-zinc ratio of 58 for 7
weeks resulted in a reduction of urinary zinc excretion from 0.52 ± 0.18 to 0.28 ± 0.15
mg/day (7.9 ± 2.8 µmol/day to 4.3 ± 2.3 µmol/day) (46). A significant reduction of plasma
zinc concentrations and changes in cellular immune response were observed. Effects on
immunity were also observed when a zinc-restricted diet with a high phytate content (molar
ratio approximately 20) was consumed by five young male volunteers for 20–24 weeks (14).
Sub-optimal zinc status has also been documented in pregnant women consuming diets with
high phytate-zinc ratios (>17) (47). Frequent reproductive cycling and high malaria
prevalence seemed to contribute to the impairment of zinc status.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the approach used for derivation of average individual requirements of zinc
used in the FAO/IAEA/WHO 1996 report (32) and the resulting estimates still seem valid and
useful for assessment of the adequacy of zinc intakes in population groups and for planning
diets for defined population groups.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
267
Future research 
As already indicated in the FAO/IAEA/WHO 1996 report (32), there is an urgent need to
characterise the early functional effects of zinc deficiency and to define their relation to
pathologic changes. This knowledge is especially needed for understanding the role of zinc
deficiency in the aetiology of stunting and impaired immunocompetence.
For a better understanding of the relationship between diet and zinc supply, there is a
need for further research to carefully evaluate the availability of zinc from diets typical of
developing countries. The research should include an assessment of the effect of availability
of adopting realistic and culturally accepted food preparation practises such as fermentation,
germination, soaking, and inclusion of inexpensive and available animal protein sources in
plant-food-based diets.
268
Chapter 16: Zinc
1. Hambidge, K.M. 1987. Zinc. In: Trace elements in human and animal nutrition. Mertz,
W., ed. 5th, Vol. 1., p.1-137. Orlando, Florida, Academic Press, Inc. 
2. Shankar, A.H. &  Prasad A.S. 1998. Zinc and immune function: the biological basis of
altered resistance to infection. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68(suppl.): 447S-463S
3. Sandström, B. 1997. Bio-availability of zinc. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 51(suppl. 1): S17-S19
4. King, J.C. & Turnlund, J.R. 1989. Human zinc requirements. In: Zinc in human biology.
Mills C.F. ed. p.335-350. Devon , U.K., Springer-Verlag. 
5. Lukaski, H.C., Bolonchuk, W,W., Klevay, L.M., Milne, D.B. &  Sandstead, H.H.
1984. Changes in plasma zinc content after exercise in men fed a low-zinc diet. Am. J.
Physiol., 247: E88-93.
6. Milne, D.B., Canfield, W.K., Gallagher, S.K., Hunt, J.R. & Klevay, L.M. 1987.
Ethanol metabolism in postmenopausal women fed a diet marginal in zinc. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 46: 688-93.
7. Baer, M.J. & King, J.C. 1984. Tissue zinc levels and zinc excretion during experimental
zinc depletion in young men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 39: 556-70.
8. Hess, F.M., King, J.C. & Margen, S. 1977. Zinc excretion in young women on low zinc
intakes and oral contraceptive agents. J. Nutr., 107: 1610-20.
9. Milne, D.B., Canfield, W.K., Mahalko, J.R. & Sandstead, H.H. 1983. Effect of dietary
zinc on whole body surface loss of zinc: impact on estimation of zinc retention by balance
method. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 38: 181-6.
10. Johnson, P.E., Hunt, C.D., Milne, D.B. & Mullen, L.K. 1993. Homeostatic control of
zinc metabolism in men: zinc excretion and balance in men fed diets low in zinc. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 57: 557-565.
11. Agett P.J. & Favier A. 1993. Zinc. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res., 63: 247-316.
12. Goldenberg, R.L., Tamura, T., Neggers, Y., Copper, R.L., Johnston, K.E., DuBard,
M.B. & Hauth, J.C. 1995. The effect of zinc supplementation on pregnancy outcome.
JAMA, 274: 463-468
13. Brown, K., Peerson, J.M. & Allen, L.H. 1998. Effects of zinc supplementation on
children’s growth. In: Role of trace elements for health promotion and disease prevention.
Sandström, B., Walter, P., eds. Bibliotheca Nutritio et Dieta, Basel: Karger; 54: 76-83.
14. Beck, F.W.J., Prasad, A.S. & Kaplan, J. 1997. Changes in cytokine production and T
cell subpopulations in experimentally induced zinc-deficient Humans. Am. J. Physiol.
272: E1002-7.
15. Sandström, B. Fairweather-Tait, S., Hurrell, R. & Van Dokkum, W. 1993. Methods
for studying mineral and trace element absorption in Humans using stable isotopes. Nutr.
Res. Revs., 6: 71-95.
16. Wastney, M.E., Gökmen, I.G., Aarmodt, R.L., Rumble, W.F., Gordon, G.E. &
Henkin, R.I. 1991. Kinetic analysis of zinc metabolism in Humans and simultaneous
administration of 65Zn and 70Zn. Am. J. Physiol., 260: R134-41.
17. Fairweather-Tait, S.J., Jackson, M.J., Fox, T.E., Wharf, S.G., Eagles, J. & Groghan,
P.C. 1993. The measurement of exchangeable pools of zinc using the stable isotope 70Zn.
Br. J. Nutr., 70: 221-34.
REFERENCES
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
269
18. Miller, L.V., Hambidge, K.M., Naake, V.L., Hong, Z., Westcott, J.L. & Fennessey,
P.V. 1994. Size of the zinc pools that exchange rapidly with plasma zinc in Humans:
Alternative techniques for measuring and relation to dietary zinc intake. J. Nutr., 124:
268-76.
19. Sian, L., Mingyan, X., Miller, L.V., Tong, L., Krebs, N.F. & Hambidge, K.M. 1996.
Zinc absorption and intestinal losses of endogenous zinc in young Chinese women with
marginal zinc intakes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 63: 348-53.
20. Sandström, B. 1989. Dietary pattern and zinc supply. In: Zinc in Human biology. Mills
C.F. ed. p. 350-363. Devon , U.K.,  Springer-Verlag. 
21. Sandström, B. & Lönnerdal, B. 1989. Promoters and antagonists of zinc absorption. In:
Zinc in Human biology. Mills C.F. ed. p.57-78. Devon , U.K., Springer-Verlag. 
22. Petterson, D., Sandström, B. & Cederblad, Å. 1994. Absorption of zinc from lupin
(Lupinus angustifolius) - based foods. Br. J. Nutr., 72: 865-71.
23. Knudsen, E., Jensen, M., Solgaard, P., Sørensen, S.S. & Sandström, B. 1995. Zinc
absorption estimated by fecal monitoring of zinc stable isotopes validated by comparison
with whole-body retention of zinc radioisotopes in Humans. J. Nutr., 125: 1274-1282.
24. Hunt, J.R., Matthys, L.A. & Johnson, L.K. 1998. Zinc absorption, mineral balance, and
blood lipids in women consuming controlled lactoovovegetarian and omnivorous diets for
8 wk. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67: 421-30.
25. Hunt, J.R., Gallagher, S.K., Johnson, L.K. & Lykken, G.I. 1995. High- versus
low-meat diets: effects on zinc absorption, iron status, and calcium, copper, iron,
magnesium, manganese, nitrogen, phosphorus, and zinc balance in postmenopausal
women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 62: 621-32.
26. Nävert, B., Sandström, B. & Cederblad, Å. 1985. Reduction of the phytate content of
bran by leavening in bread and its effect on absorption of zinc in man. Br. J. Nutr., 53:
47-53.
27. Sandström, B. & Sandberg, A.S. 1992. Inhibitory effects of isolated inositol phosphates
on zinc absorption in Humans. J Trace Elem Electrolyte Health Dis., 6: 99-103.
28. Gibson, R.S., Yeudall, F., Drost, N., Mtitimuni, B. & Cullinan, T. 1998. Dietary
interventions to prevent zinc deficiency. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68(suppl.): 484S-487S.
29. Simmer, K., Khanum, S., Carlsson, L. & Thompson, R.P.H. 1988. Nutritional
rehabilitation in Bangladesh – the importance of zinc. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 47: 1036-40.
30. Black, M.M. 1998. Zinc deficiency and child development. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68(suppl.):
464S-469S
31. Caulfield, L.E., Zavaleta, N., Shankar, A.H. & Merialdi, M. 1998. Potential
contribution of maternal zinc supplementation during pregnancy to maternal and child
survival. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68(suppl.): 499S-508S
32. AO/IAEA/WHO. 1996. Trace elements in Human nutrition and health. Geneva, World
Health Organization.
33. Taylor, C.M., Bacon, J.R., Aggett, P.J. & Bremner, I. 1991. Homeostatic regulation of
zinc absorption and endogenous losses in zinc-deprived men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 755-
63. 
34. Swanson, C.A. & King, J.C. 1987. Zinc and pregnancy outcome. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 46:
763-771.
35. World Health Organization. 1998. Complementary feeding of young children in
developing countries: a review of current scientific knowledge. Geneva, World Health
Organization.
270
Chapter 16: Zinc
36. FAO/WHO/UNU. 1985. Energy and Protein Requirements. Report of a Joint
FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation. Technical Report Series 724. Geneva, World
Health Organization.
37. Fischer, P.W.F., Giroux, A. & L'Abbé, M.R. 1984. Effect of zinc supplementation on
copper status in adult man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 40: 743-6.
38. Yadrick, M.K., Kenney, M.A. & Winterfeldt, E.A. 1989. Iron, copper, and zinc status:
response to supplementation with zinc or zinc and iron in adult females. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 49: 145-50.
39. Patterson, W.P., Winkelmann, M. & Perry, M.C. 1985. Zinc-induced copper
deficiency: megamineral sideroblastic anemia. Ann. Internal Med.. 103: 385-6.
40. Porter, K.G., McMaster, D., Elmes, M.E. & Love, A.H.G. 1977. Anemia and low
serum-copper during zinc therapy. Lancet, II: 774.
41. Hooper, P.L., Visconti, L., Garry, P.J. & Johnson, G.E. 1980. Zinc lowers high-density
lipoprotein-cholesterol levels. JAMA, 244: 1960-2.
42. Chandra, R.K. 1984. Excessive intake of zinc impairs immune responses. JAMA, 252:
1443-6.
43. Gibson, R.S. & Ferguson, E.L. 1998. Assessment of dietary zinc in a population. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 68(suppl.): 430S-434S
44. Ruz, M., Castillo-Duran, C., Lara, X., Codoceo, J., Rebolledo, A. & Atalah, E. 1997.
A 14-mo zinc-supplementation trial in apparently healthy Chilean preschool children. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 66: 1406-13.
45. Krebs, N.F., Reidinger, C.J., Hartley, S., Robertson, A.D. & Hambidge, K.M. 1995.
Zinc supplementation during lactation: effects on maternal status and milk zinc
concentrations. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 61: 1030-6.
46. Ruz, M., Cavan, K.R., Bettger, W.J. & Gibson, R.S. 1992. Erythrocytes, erythrocyte
membranes, neutrophils and platelets as biopsy materials for the assessment of zinc status
in Humans. Br. J. Nutr., 68: 515-27.
47. Gibson, R.S. & Huddle, J.M. 1998. Suboptimal zinc status in pregnant Malawian
women: its association with low intakes of poorly available zinc, frequent reproductive
cycling, and malaria. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 67: 702-9.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
271
Chapter 17
Dietary antioxidants: a consideration of
factors influencing requirements
Nutrients with an antioxidant role
T
he potential beneficial effects from antioxidants in protecting against disease have been
used as an argument for recommending increasing intakes of several nutrients above
those derived by conventional methods. If it is possible to quantify such claims,
antioxidant properties should be considered in decisions concerning the daily requirements of
these nutrients. This section examines metabolic aspects of the most important dietary
antioxidants – vitamins C and E, the carotenoids, and several minerals – and tries to define
the populations which may be at risk of inadequacy to determine whether antioxidant
properties per se should be and can be considered in setting a requirement. In addition, pro-
oxidant metabolism and the importance of iron are also considered.
Members of the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council in the
United States, recently defined a dietary antioxidant as a substance in foods which
significantly decreases the adverse effects of reactive oxygen species, reactive nitrogen
species, or both on normal physiologic function in humans (1). It is recognised that this
definition is somewhat narrow because maintenance of membrane stability is also a feature of
antioxidant function (2) and an important antioxidant function of both vitamin A (3) and zinc
(4). However, it was decided to restrict consideration of antioxidant function in this document
to nutrients which were likely to interact more directly with reactive species.
The need for biologic antioxidants
It is now well established that free radicals, especially superoxide (O2
·- ), nitric oxide (NO·),
and other reactive species such as H2O2, are continuously produced in vivo (5-7). Superoxide
in particular is produced by leakage from the electron transport chains within the
mitochondria and microsomal P450 systems (8) or formed more deliberately, for example, by
activated phagocytes as part of the primary immune defence in response to foreign substances
or to combat infection by micro-organisms (9). Nitric oxide is produced from L-arginine by
nitric oxide synthases, and these enzymes are found in virtually every tissue of the
mammalian body, albeit at widely different levels (7). Nitric oxide is a free radical but is
believed to be essentially a beneficial metabolite and indeed it may react with lipid peroxides
and function as an antioxidant (10). Nitric oxide also serves as a mediator whereby
macrophages express cytotoxic activity against micro-organisms and neoplastic cells (11). If
nitric oxide is at a sufficiently high concentration, it can react rapidly with superoxide in the
absence of a catalyst to form peroxynitrite. Peroxynitrite is a potentially damaging nitrogen
species which can react through several different mechanisms, including the formation of an
intermediate with the reactivity of the hydroxyl radical (12).
To cope with potentially damaging reactive oxidant species (ROS), aerobic tissues
contain endogenously produced antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD),
glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and catalase and several exogenously acquired radical-
scavenging substances such as vitamins E and C and the carotenoids (13). Under normal
conditions the high concentrations of SOD maintains superoxide concentrations too low to
272
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
allow the formation of peroxynitrite. It is also important to mention the antioxidant reduced
glutathione (GSH). GSH is ubiquitous in aerobic tissues, and although it is not a nutrient, it is
synthesised from sulfhydryl-containing amino acids and is highly important in intermediary
antioxidant metabolism (14).
Integrated antioxidant defences protect tissues and are presumably in equilibrium with
continuously generated ROS to maintain tissues metabolically intact most of the time.
Disturbances to the system occur when production of ROS is rapidly increased, for example,
by excessive exercise, high exposure to a xenobiotic compounds (such as an anaesthetic,
pollutants, or unusual food), infection, or trauma. Superoxide production is increased by
activation of NADPH oxidases in inflammatory cells or after the production of xanthine
oxidase, which follows ischaemia. The degree of damage resulting from the temporary
imbalance depends on the ability of the antioxidant systems to respond to the oxidant or pro-
oxidant load. Fruits and vegetables are good sources of many antioxidants, and it is reported
that diets rich in these foods are associated with a lower risk of the chronic diseases of cancer
(15) and heart disease (16). Hence, it is believed that a healthful diet maintains the exogenous
antioxidants at or near optimal levels thus reducing the risk of tissue damage. The most
prominent representatives of dietary antioxidants are vitamin C, tocopherols, carotenoids, and
flavonoids (17-19). Requirements for flavonoids are not being considered at this time and
work on this subject is still very much in its infancy. In contrast, several intervention studies
have been carried out to determine whether supplements of the other nutrients can provide
additional benefits against such diseases.
The components in biologic tissues make an ideal mixture of substrates for oxidation.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), oxygen, and transition metals are present in abundance
but are prevented from reaction by cellular organisation and structure. PUFAs are present in
membranes but are always found with vitamin E. Transition metals, particularly iron, are
bound to both transport and storage proteins; abundant binding sites on such proteins prevent
overloading the protein molecule with metal ions. Tissue structures, however, break down
during inflammation and disease, and free iron and other transition metals have been detected
(20, 21). Potentially damaging metabolites can arise from interactions between transition
metals and the ROS described above. In particular the highly reactive hydroxyl radical can be
formed by the Fenton (reaction 1) and Haber-Weiss reactions (reaction 2; with an iron-salt
catalyst) (22). Pathologic conditions greatly increase the concentrations of both superoxide
and nitric oxide, and the formation of peroxynitrite has been demonstrated in macrophages,
neutrophils, and cultured endothelium (reaction 3) (12, 23). Peroxynitrite can react through
several different mechanisms, including the formation of an intermediate with the reactivity
of the hydroxyl radical (12).
Fe2+ + H2O2
= Fe3+ + OH. + OH-
1
O2
-. + H2O2 = O2 + OH. + OH-
2
NO +   O2
During inflammation or other forms of stress and disease, new measures are adopted
by the body to counter potential pro-oxidant damage. The body alters the transport and
distribution of iron by blocking iron mobilisation and absorption and stimulating iron uptake
from plasma by liver, spleen, and macrophages (3, 24, 25). Nitric oxide has been shown to
play a role in the coordination of iron traffic by mimicking the consequences of iron
starvation and leading to the cellular uptake of iron (26). The changes accompanying disease
are generally termed the acute-phase response and are, generally, protective (27). Some of the
changes in plasma acute-phase reactants which affect iron at the onset of disease or trauma
are shown in Table 57.
.- = ONOO.                                                         3
Reduce levels of circulating and tissue iron to
Reduce level of circulating iron available for
reduce risk of free radical production and
Increase in fibrinogen
Restriction of inflammatory damage to
System
Changes in plasma
Physiologic objectives
pro-oxidant damage.
microbial growth.
diseased area.
Systems altered in disease which reduce risk of autoxidation
Movement of plasma iron from blood to
Decrease in iron absorption
Positive acute phase proteins
Increase in antiproteinases
Increase in haptoglobin
Mobilisation and metabolism of iron
Decrease in transferrin
Increase in lactoferrin
Increase in ferritin
storage sites.
Table 57
Scavenge vitamin C to prevent interaction of
Reduce levels of vitamin C in the circulation
Protect granulocytes and macrophages from
affected by disease (e.g., lungs in smokers).
Facilitate movement of vitamin C to tissues
inflamed tissue – or where free iron may be
which 70% are granulocytes.
Production of reactive oxygen species to
– because it is a potential pro-oxidant in
vitamin C with free iron.
oxidative damage.
combat infection.
present.
chronic illness or stress-associated conditions.
Reduction of plasma vitamin C in acute and
White blood cells
Variable increase in white blood cells of
Temporary fall in leukocyte vitamin C
Vitamin C metabolism
Uptake of vitamin C from plasma by
associated with acute stress.
stimulated granulocytes.
Source: Modified from Koj (28) and Thurnham (3, 29, 30).
274
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
Pro-oxidant activity of biologic antioxidants
Most biologic antioxidants are antioxidants because when they accept an unpaired electron,
the free radical intermediate formed has a relatively long half-life in the normal biologic
environment. The long half-life means that these intermediates remain stable for long enough
to interact in a controlled fashion with intermediates which prevent autoxidation, and the
excess energy of the surplus electron is dissipated without damage to the tissues. Thus it is
believed that the tocopheroxyl radical formed by oxidation of α-tocopherol is sufficiently
stable to enable its reduction by vitamin C or GSH to regenerate the quinol (31, 32) rather
than oxidizing surrounding PUFAs. Likewise the oxidized forms of vitamin C, the ascorbyl
free radical and dehydroascorbate, may be recycled back to ascorbate by GSH or the enzyme
dehydroascorbate reductase (13). The ability to recycle these dietary antioxidants may be an
indication of their physiologic essentiality to function as antioxidants.
Carotenoids are also biologic antioxidants but their antioxidant properties very much
depend on oxygen tension and concentration (33, 34). At low oxygen tension β-carotene acts
as a chain-breaking antioxidant whereas at high oxygen tension it readily autoxidizes and
exhibits pro-oxidant behaviour (33). Palozza (34) reviewed much of the evidence and
suggests that β-carotene has antioxidant activity between 2 and 20 mmHg of oxygen tension,
but at the oxygen tension in air or above (>150 mmHg) it is much less effective as an
antioxidant and can show pro-oxidant activity as the oxygen tension increases. Palozza (34)
also suggests that autoxidation reactions of β-carotene may be controlled by the presence of
other antioxidants (e.g., vitamins E and C) or other carotenoids. There is some evidence that
large supplements of fat-soluble nutrients such as β-carotene and other carotenoids may
compete with each other during absorption and lower plasma concentrations of other nutrients
derived from the diet. However, a lack of other antioxidants is unlikely to explain the
increased incidence of lung cancer in the α-tocopherol β-carotene intervention study, because
there was no difference in cancer incidence between the group which received both
β-carotene and α-tocopherol and the groups which received one treatment only (35).
The free radical formed from a dietary antioxidant is potentially a pro-oxidant as is
any other free radical. In biologic conditions which might deviate from the norm, there is
always the potential for an antioxidant free radical to become a pro-oxidant if a suitable
receptor molecule is present to accept the electron and promote the autoxidation (36). Mineral
ions are particularly important pro-oxidants. For example, vitamin C will interact with both
copper and iron to generate cuprous or ferrous ions, respectively, both of which are potent
pro-oxidants (29, 37). Fortunately, mineral ions are tightly bound to proteins and are usually
unable to react with tissue components unless there is a breakdown in tissue integrity. Such
circumstances can occur in association with disease and excessive phagocyte activation, but
even under these circumstances there is rapid metabolic accommodation in the form of the
acute-phase response to minimise the potentially damaging effects of an increase in free
mineral ions in extra-cellular fluids (Table 57).
Nutrients associated with endogenous antioxidant mechanisms
Both zinc and selenium are intimately involved in protecting the body against oxidant stress.
Zinc combined with copper is found in the cytoplasmic form of SOD whereas zinc and
magnesium occur in the mitochondrial enzyme. SOD occurs in all aerobic cells and is
responsible for the dismutation of superoxide (reaction 4):
.- + O2
.- + 2H+ = H2O2 + O2 
4
O2
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
275
Hydrogen peroxide produced as a product of dismutation reaction is removed by GPx
of which selenium is an integral component (reaction 5). To function effectively, this enzyme
also needs a supply of hydrogen, which it obtains from GSH. Cellular concentrations of GSH
are maintained by the riboflavin-dependent enzyme glutathione reductase.
H2O2 + 2GSH = GSSG + 2H2O
5
Four forms of selenium-dependent GPx have been described which have different
activities in different parts of the cell (38). In addition, a selenium-dependent thyrodoxin
reductase was recently characterised in human thyrocytes. Thyrodoxin reductase may be
particularly important to the thyroid gland because it can cope with higher concentrations of
peroxide and hydroperoxides generated in the course of thyroid hormone synthesis better than
can GPx (39). It is suggested that in combination with iodine deficiency, the inability to
remove high concentrations of hydrogen peroxide may cause atrophy in the thyroid gland,
resulting in myxedematous cretinism (39).
SOD and GPx are widely distributed in aerobic tissues and, if no catalytic metal ions
are available, endogenously produced superoxide and hydrogen peroxide at physiologic
concentrations may have limited, if any, damaging effects (36). SOD and GPx are of
fundamental importance to the life of the cell, and their activity is not readily reduced by
deficiencies in dietary intake of these nutrients. In contrast, enzyme activity can be stimulated
by increased oxidant stress (e.g., ozone) (40). Activities of zinc-dependent enzymes have been
shown to be particularly resistant to the influence of dietary zinc (41), and although
erythrocyte GPx activity correlates with selenium when the intake is below 60–80 µg/day
(42), there is no evidence of impaired clinical function at low GPx activities found in humans.
Nevertheless, one selenium intervention study reported remarkably lower risks of several
cancers after 4.5 years of selenium at 200 µg/day (43). The effects were so strong on total
cancer mortality that the study was stopped prematurely. However, the subjects were patients
with a history of basal or squamous cell carcinomas and were not typical of the general
population. In addition, a prospective analysis of serum selenium in cancer patients (44) (1.72
µmol/L) found very little difference from concentrations in matched controls (1.63 µmol/L)
although the difference was significant (45). Furthermore, areas with high selenium intakes
have a lower cancer incidence than do those with low intakes, but the high selenium areas
were the least industrialized (45).
Nutrients with radical-quenching properties
Vitamins C and E are the principal nutrients which possess radical-quenching properties. Both
are powerful antioxidants, and the most important difference between these two compounds
stems from their different solubility in biologic fluids. Vitamin C is water soluble and is
therefore especially found in the aqueous fractions of the cell and in body fluids whereas
vitamin E is highly lipophilic and is found in membranes and lipoproteins.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E falls into the class of conventional antioxidants which are generally phenols or
aromatic amines (see Chapter 9). In the case of the four tocopherols that together constitute
vitamin E, the initial step involves a very rapid transfer of phenolic hydrogen to the recipient
free radical with the formation of a phenoxyl radical from vitamin E. The phenoxyl radical is
resonance stabilised and is relatively unreactive towards lipid or oxygen. It does not therefore
continue the chain (33, 46). However, the phenoxyl radical is no longer an antioxidant and to
maintain the antioxidant properties of membranes, it must be recycled or repaired – that is,
276
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
reconverted to vitamin E – because the amount of vitamin E present in membranes can be
several thousand-fold less than the amount of potentially oxidizable substrate (47). Water-
soluble vitamin C is the popular candidate for this role (31), but thiols and particularly GSH
can also function in vitro (32, 48-50).
There are eight possible isomers of vitamin E, but α-tocopherol (5,7,8 trimethyl tocol)
is the most biologically important antioxidant in vivo (46). In plasma samples, more than 90
percent is present as α-tocopherol but there may be approximately 10 percent of γ-tocopherol.
In foods such as margarine and soy products the γ form may be predominant and palm oil
products are rich in the tocotrienols.
Vitamin E is found throughout the body in both cell and sub-cellular membranes. It is
believed to be orientated with the quinol ring structure on the outer surface (i.e., in contact
with the aqueous phase) to enable it to be maintained in its active reduced form by circulating
reductants such as vitamin C (31). Within biologic membranes, vitamin E is believed to
intercalate with phospholipids and provide protection to PUFAs. PUFAs are particularly
susceptible to free radical–mediated oxidation because of their methylene-interrupted double-
bond structure. The amount of PUFAs in the membrane far exceeds the amount of vitamin E,
and the tocopherol-PUFAs ratios are highest in tissues where oxygen exposure is greatest and
not necessarily where the PUFAs content is highest (47).
Oxidation of PUFAs leads to disturbances in membrane structure and function and is
damaging to cell function. Vitamin E is highly efficient at preventing the autoxidation of lipid
and it appears as if the primary, and possibly only, role in biologic tissues is to provide this
function (46). Autoxidation of lipid is initiated by a free radical abstracting hydrogen from
PUFA to form a lipid radical (reaction 6) which is followed by a rearrangement of the double-
bond structure to form a conjugated diene. In vitro the presence of minute amounts of
peroxides and transition metals will stimulate the formation of the initial radical. Oxygen adds
to the lipid radical to form a lipid peroxide (reaction 7) which then reacts with another lipid
molecule to form a hydroperoxide and a new lipid radical (reaction 8). This process is shown
in general terms below for the autoxidation of any organic molecule (RH), where the initial
abstraction is caused by a hydroxyl radical (OH·).
Autoxidation or lipid peroxidation is represented by reactions 6 and 7. The process
stops naturally when reaction between two radicals (reaction 9) occurs more frequently than
does reaction 8.
ROO·  + ROO· = non-radical products 
9
The presence of the chain-breaking antioxidant, vitamin E (ArOH), reacts in place of
RH shown in reaction 8 and donates the hydrogen from the chromanol ring to form the
hydroperoxide (reaction 10). The vitamin E radical (ArO·, tocopheroxyl radical) which is
formed is fairly stable and therefore stops autoxidation. Hydroperoxides formed by lipid
peroxidation can be released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2 and then
degraded by GPx in the cell cytoplasm (see Chapter 15).
RH + OH· = R·+ H2O
6
R· + O2 = ROO· 
7
ROO· + RH = ROOH + R·
8
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
277
ROO· + ArOH = ArO· + ROOH 
10
Vitamin C
Many, if not all of the biologic properties of vitamin C are linked to its redox properties (see
Chapter 6). For example, essential defects in scurvy such as the breakdown of connective
tissue fibres (51) and muscular weakness (52) are both linked to hydroxylation reactions in
which ascorbate maintains loosely bound iron in the ferrous form to prevent its oxidation to
the ferric form, which makes the hydroxylase enzymes inactive (53). Ascorbate exhibits
similar redox functions in catecholamine biosynthesis (53) and in microsomal cytochrome
P450 enzyme activity, although the latter may only be important in young animals (54). In the
eye, vitamin C concentrations may be 50 times higher than in the plasma and may protect
against the oxidative damage of light (55). Vitamin C is also present in the gonads, where it
may play a critical role in sperm maturation (56). Spermatogenesis involves many more cell
divisions than does oogenesis, resulting in an increased risk of mutation. Fraga et al. (57)
reported that levels of sperm oxidized nucleoside 8-OH-2’-deoxyguanosine (an indicator of
oxidative damage to DNA) varied inversely with the intake of vitamin C (5-250 mg/day). No
apparent effects on sperm quality were noted. Frei (58) also showed that vitamin C was
superior to all other biologic antioxidants in plasma in protecting lipids exposed ex vivo to a
variety of sources of oxidative stress. The importance of vitamin C in stabilising various
plasma components such as folate, homo-cysteine, proteins, other micronutrients, etc. has not
been properly evaluated. When blood plasma is separated from erythrocytes, vitamin C is the
first antioxidant to disappear.
Vitamin C is a powerful antioxidant because it can donate a hydrogen atom and form a
relatively stable ascorbyl free radical (Figure 27). As a scavenger of ROS, ascorbate has been
shown to be effective against the superoxide radical anion, hydrogen peroxide, the hydroxyl
radical, and singlet oxygen (59, 60). Vitamin C also scavenges reactive nitrogen oxide species
to prevent nitrosation of target molecules (61). The ascorbyl free radical can be converted
back to reduced ascorbate by accepting another hydrogen atom or it can undergo further
oxidation to dehydroascorbate. Dehydroascorbate is unstable but is more fat soluble than
ascorbate and is taken up 10–20 times more rapidly by erythrocytes, where it will be reduced
back to ascorbate by GSH or NADPH from the hexose monophosphate shunt (56).
Thus, mechanisms exist to recycle vitamin C similarly to those for vitamin E. The
existence of a mechanism to maintain plasma ascorbate in the reduced state means that the
level of vitamin C necessary for optimal antioxidant activity is not absolute because the
turnover will change in response to oxidant pressure. Recycling of vitamin C will depend on
the reducing environment which exists in metabolically active cells. In atrophic tissues or
tissues exposed to inflammation, cell viability may fail and with it the ability to recycle
vitamin C. In such an environment, the ability of newly released granulocytes (62) or
macrophages (63) to scavenge vitamin C from the surrounding fluid may be invaluable for
conservation of an essential nutrient as well as reducing the risk of ascorbate becoming a
pro-oxidant through its ability to reduce iron (37).
278
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
Figure 27
Vitamin C can donate a hydrogen atom 
and form a relatively stable ascorbyl free radical
β-Carotene and other carotenoids
Many hundreds of carotenoids are found in nature but relatively few are found in human
tissues, the five main ones being β-carotene, lutein, lycopene, β-cryptoxanthin, and
α-carotene (17, 18, 64). β-Carotene is the main source of pro-vitamin A in the diet. There are
approximately 50 carotenoids with pro-vitamin A activity, but β-carotene is the most
important and is one of the most widely distributed carotenoids in plant species (64).
Approximately 2–6 mg β-carotene is consumed by adults daily in developed countries (65,
66) and similar amounts of lutein (67) and lycopene (66) are probably also consumed. Smaller
amounts may be consumed in the developing world (68, 69). β-Cryptoxanthin is a pro-vitamin
A carotenoid which is found mainly in fruits (66). Consumption is small but bio-availability
of carotenoids may be greater from fruit than vegetable, so its contribution to dietary intake
and vitamin A status may be higher than the amount in the diet would predict.
β-Carotene has the general structure of this group of compounds and has two
6-membered carbon rings (β-ionone rings) separated by 18 carbon atoms in the form of a
conjugated chain of double bonds. The latter is responsible for the antioxidant properties of
the molecule (33, 70, 71). β-Carotene is unique in possessing two β-ionone rings in its
molecule which are essential for vitamin A activity. The chemical properties of the
carotenoids closely relate to the extended system of conjugated double bonds, which occupies
the central part of carotenoid molecules, and various functional groups on the terminal ring
structures. The ROS scavenged by carotenoids are singlet oxygen and peroxyl radicals (33,
72-74). Carotenoids in general and lycopene specifically are very efficient at quenching
singlet oxygen (72, 73). In this process the carotene absorbs the excess energy from singlet
oxygen and then releases it as heat. Singlet oxygen is generated during photosynthesis;
therefore, carotenoids are important for protecting plant tissues, but there is limited evidence
for this role in humans. However, ß-carotene has been used in the treatment of erythropoietic
protoporphyria (75), which is a light-sensitive condition which in some persons respond to
treatment with amounts of β-carotene (in excess of 180 mg/day) (76). It has been suggested
that large amounts of dietary carotenes may provide some protection against solar radiation
but results are equivocal. No benefit was reported when large amounts of β-carotene were
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
279
used to treat persons with a high risk of non-melanomatous skin cancer (77). However, two
carotenoids – lutein (3,3’-dihydroxy α-carotene) and zeaxanthin (the 3,3’-dihydroxylated
form of β-carotene) – are found specifically associated with the rods and cones in the eye (78)
and may protect the retinal pigment epithelium against the oxidative effects of blue light (79,
80).
Burton and Ingold (33) were the first to draw attention to the radical-trapping
properties of β-carotene. Using in vitro studies, they showed that β-carotene was effective in
reducing the rate of lipid peroxidation at the low oxygen concentrations found in tissues.
Because all carotenoids have the same basic structure, they should all have similar properties.
Indeed, several authors suggest that the hydroxy-carotenoids are better radical-trapping
antioxidants than is β-carotene (81, 82). It has also been suggested that because the carotenoid
molecule is long enough to span the bilayer lipid membrane (83), the presence of oxy
functional groups on the ring structures may facilitate similar reactivation of the carotenoid
radical in a manner similar to that of the phenoxyl radical of vitamin E (33).
There is some evidence for an antioxidant role for β-carotene in immune cells.
Bendich (84) suggested that β-carotene protects phagocytes from auto-oxidative damage;
enhances T and B lymphocyte proliferative responses; stimulates effector T cell function; and
enhances macrophage, cytotoxic T cell, and natural killer cell tumoricidal capacity. Some data
are in conflict with evidence of protective effects on the immune system (85, 86) and other
data have found no effect (87). An explanation for the discrepancy may reside in the type of
subjects chosen. Defences may be boosted in those at risk but it may not be possible to
demonstrate any benefit in healthy subjects (88).
A requirement for antioxidant nutrients
Free radicals are a product of tissue metabolism, and the potential damage which they can
cause is minimised by the antioxidant capacity and repair mechanisms within the cell. Thus in
a metabolically active tissue cell in a healthy subject with an adequate dietary intake, damage
to tissue will be minimal and most of the damage occurring will be repaired (36). An
important dietary source of antioxidant nutrients is the intake of fruit and vegetables, and it is
now well established that persons consuming generous amounts of these foods have a lower
risk of chronic disease than do those whose intake is small (15, 16, 89). These observations
suggest that the antioxidant nutrient requirements of the general population can be met by a
generous consumption of fruit and vegetables and the slogan “5 portions a day” has been
promoted to publicize this idea (90).
Occasionally, damage may occur which is not repaired and the risk of this happening
may increase in the presence of infection or physical trauma. Such effects may exacerbate an
established infection or may initiate irreversible changes leading to a state of chronic disease
(e.g., a neoplasm or atherosclerotic lesions). Can such effects also be minimised by a
generous intake of dietary antioxidants in the form of fruit and vegetables or are supplements
needed?
It is generally recognised that certain groups of people have an increased risk of free
radical - initiated damage. Premature infants, for example, are at increased risk of oxidative
damage because they are born with immature antioxidant status (91-93) and this may be
inadequate for coping with high levels of oxygen and light radiation. People who smoke are
exposed to free radicals inhaled in the tobacco smoke and have an increased risk of many
diseases. People abusing alcohol need to develop increased metabolic capacity to handle the
extra alcohol load. Similar risks may be faced by people working in environments where there
are elevated levels of volatile solvents (e.g., petrol and cleaning fluids, in distilleries, chemical
plants, etc.). Car drivers and other people working in dense traffic may be exposed to elevated
280
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
levels of exhaust fumes. Human metabolism can adapt to a wide range of xenobiotic
substances, but metabolic activity may be raised with the consequent production of more ROS
which are potentially toxic to cell metabolism.
Of the above groups, smokers are the most widely accessible people and this has made
them a target for several large antioxidant-nutrient intervention studies. In addition, smokers
often display low plasma concentrations of carotenoids and vitamin C. However, no obvious
benefits to the health of smokers have emerged from these studies and, in fact, β-carotene
supplements were associated with an increased risk of lung cancer in two separate studies (35,
94) and with more fatal cardiac events in one of them (95). Other risk groups identified by
their already having had some non-malignant form of cancer, such as non-melanomatous skin
cancer (77) or a colorectal adenoma (96), showed no effect on subsequent recurrences after
several years of elevated intakes of antioxidant nutrients. The use of β-carotene (77) or
vitamin E alone or in combination with vitamin C (96)  showed no benefits. Thus, the results
of these clinical trials do not support the use of supplementation with antioxidant
micronutrients as a means of reducing cancer or even cardiovascular rates although in the
general population, toxicity from such supplements is very unlikely.
Some intervention trials however have been more successful in demonstrating a health
benefit. Stitch and colleagues (97, 98) gave large quantities of β-carotene and sometimes
vitamin A to chewers of betel quids in Kerala, India, and to Canadian Inuits with pre-
malignant lesions of the oral tract and showed reductions in leukoplakia and micronuclei from
the buccal mucosa. Blot and colleagues (99) reported a reduction (13 percent) in gastric
cancer mortality in people living in Linxian Province, People’s Republic of China, after a
cocktail of β-carotene, vitamin E, and selenium. These studies are difficult to interpret
because the subjects may have been marginally malnourished at the start and the supplements
may have merely restored nutritional adequacy. However, correcting malnutrition is unlikely
to be the explanation for the highly successful selenium supplementation study of US patients
with a history of basal or squamous cell cancers of the skin (43). Interestingly, the
intervention with 200 µg/day of selenium for an average of 4.5 years had no effect on the
recurrence of the skin neoplasms (relative risk [RR]1.10, confidence interval 0.95–1.28).
However, analysis of secondary endpoints showed significant reductions in total cancer
mortality (RR 0.5) and incidence (RR 0.63) and in the incidences of lung, colorectal, and
prostate cancers. The mean age of this group was 63 years and obviously they were not a
normal adult population, but results of further studies are awaited with keen interest. Lastly,
results of the Cambridge Heart Antioxidant Study should be mentioned because they provide
some support for a beneficial effect of vitamin E in persons who have had a myocardial
infarction (100). Recruits to the study were randomly assigned to receive vitamin E (800 or
400 mg/day) or placebo. Initial results of the trial suggested a significant reduction in non-
fatal myocardial infarctions but a non-significant excess of cardiovascular deaths (100).The
trial officially ended in 1996, but mortality has continued to be monitored and the authors
now report significantly fewer deaths in those who received vitamin E for the full trial (101)
(see Chapter 9).
In conclusion, some studies have shown that health benefits can be obtained by some
people with increased risk of disease from supplements of antioxidant nutrients. The amounts
of supplements used have, however, been large and the effect possibly has been
pharmacologic. Further work is needed to show whether more modest increases in nutrient
intakes in healthy adult populations will delay or prevent the onset of chronic disease. The
evidence available regarding health benefits to be achieved by increasing intakes of
antioxidant nutrients does not assist in setting nutrient requirements.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
281
1. Young, V.R., Erdman, J.W.J. & King, J.C. 1998. Dietary reference intakes. Proposed
definition and plan for review of dietary antioxidant and related compounds. Washington
D.C. National Academy Press.
2. Dormandy, T.L. 1983. An approach to free radicals. Lancet, ii:1010-1014.
3. Thurnham, D,I. 1990. Antioxidants and pro-oxidants in malnourished populations. Proc.
Nutr. Soc., 48: 247-259.
4. Shankar, A.H. & Prasad, A.S. 1998. Zinc and immune function: the biological basis of
altered resistance to infection. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 68: 447S-463S.
5. Halliwell, B. & Gutteridgem J.M.C. 1989. Free radicals in biology and medicine. 2nd
ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
6. Ames, B.N. 1983. Dietary carcinogens and anticarcinogens, oxygen radicals and
degenerative diseases. Science, 221: 1256-1264.
7. Moncada, S. & Higgs, E.A. 1993. Mechanisms of disease: the L-arginine-nitric oxide
pathway. N. Engl. J. Med., 329: 2002-2012.
8. Fridovich, I. 1983. Superoxide radical: an endogenous toxicant. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol
Toxicol., 23: 239-257.
9. Baboire, M.B. 1973. Oxygen microbial killing of phagocytes. N. Engl. J. Med., 298:659-
680.
10. Hogg, N., Kalyanaraman. B., Joseph. J., Struck. A. & Parthasarthy, S. 1993.
Inhibition of low density lipoprotein oxidation by nitric oxide. FEBS Lett, 334:170-174.
11. Hibbs, J.B.J., Taintor, R.R., Vavrin, Z. & Rachlin, E.M. 1988. Nitric oxide: a
cytotoxic activated macrophage effector molecule. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.,
157:87-94.
12. Koppenol, W.H., Moreno, J.J., Pryor, W.A., Ischiropoulos, H. & Beckman, J.S. 1992.
Peroxynitrite, a cloaked oxidant formed by nitric oxide and superoxide. Chem. Res.
Toxicol., 5: 834-842.
13. Diplock, A.T., Charleux, J-L. & Crozier-Willi, G. 1998. Functional food science and
defence against reactive oxidative species. Br. J. Nutr., 80: S77-S112.
14. Meister A. 1988. Glutathione metabolism and its selective modification. J. Biol. Chem.,
263: 17205-17206.
15. Hennekens, C.H. 1986. Micronutrients and cancer prevention. N. Engl. J. Med.,
315:1288-1289.
16. Van Poppel, G., Kardinaal, A.F.M., Princen, H.M.G. & Kok, F.J. 1994. Antioxidants
and coronary heart disease. Ann. Med., 26:429-434.
17. Thurnham, D.I. 1994. Carotenoids: functions and fallacies. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53: 77-87.
18. Rock, C.L., Jacob, R.A. & Bowen, P.E. 1996. Update on the biological characteristics of
the antioxidant micronutrients: vitamin C, vitamin E and the carotenoids. J. Am. Diet.
Assoc., 96:693-702.
19. Hertog, M.G.L., Feskens, E.J.M., Hollman, P.C.H., Katan, M.B. & Kromhout, D.
1993. Dietary antioxdant flavonoids and risk of coronary heart disease: the Zutphen
Elderly Study. Lancet, 342:1007-1011.
REFERENCES
282
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
20. Chevion, M., Jiang, Y., Har-El, R., Berenshtein, E., Uretzky, G. & Kitrossky, N.
1993. Copper and iron are mobilised following myocardial ischemia: Possible predictive
criteria for tissue injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 90: 1102-1106.
21. Beare, S. & Steward, W.P. 1996. Plasma free iron and chemotherapy toxicity. Lancet
347:342-343.
22. Halliwell. B. & Gutteridge. J.M.C. 1992. Biologically relevant metal ion-dependent
hydroxyl radical generation. An update. FEBS, 307: 108-112.
23. Carreras, M.C., Pargament, G.A., Catz, S.D., Poderoso, J.J. & Boveris, A. 1994.
Kinetics of nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide production and formation of peroxynitrite
during the respirtory burst of Human neutrophils. FEBS Lett., 341:65-68.
24. Thurnham, D.I. 1995. Iron as a pro-oxidant. In: Wharton BA, Ashwell M, eds. Iron,
nutritional and physiological significance. p.31-41.London: Chapmann & Hall. 
25. Weiss, G., Wachter, H. & Fuchs, D. 1995. Linkage of cell-mediated immunity to iron
metabolism. Immunol. Today, 16: 495-500.
26. Pantopoulos, K., Weiss, G. & Hentze, M.W. 1994. Nitric oxide and the
post-transcriptional control of cellular iron traffic. Trends Cell. Biol., 4: 82-86.
27. Thompson, D., Milford-Ward, A. & Whicher, J.T. 1992. The value of acute phase
protein measurements in clinical practice. Ann. Clin. Biochem., 29: 123-131.
28. Koj., A. 1985. Biological functions of acute phase proteins. In: Gordon AH, Koj A, eds.
The acute phase response to injury and infection. p.145-160. London: Elsevier. 
29. Thurnham, D.I. 1994. β-Carotene, are we misreading the signals in risk groups? Some
analogies with vitamin C. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53:557-569.
30. Thurnham, D.I. 1997. Impact of disease on markers of micronutrient status. Proc. Nutr.
Soc., 56: 421-431.
31. Packer, J.E., Slater, T.F. & Willson, R.L. 1979. Direct observations of a free radical
interaction between vitamin E and vitamin C. Nature, 278: 737-738.
32. Niki, E., Tsuchiya, J., Tanimura, R. & Kamiya, Y. 1982. Regeneration of vitamin E
from α-chromanoxyl radical by glutathione and vitamin C. Chem. Lett., 27: 798-792.
33. Burton, G.W. & Ingold, K.U. 1984. B-carotene: an unusual type of lipid antioxidant.
Science, 224: 569-573.
34. Palozza, P. 1998. Prooxidant actions of carotenoids in biologic systems. Nutr. Rev., 56:
257-265.
35. Heinonen, O.P., Huttunen, J.K., Albanes, D. & ATBC cancer prevention study
group. 1994. The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer
and other cancers in male smokers. N. Engl. J. Med., 330: 1029-1035.
36. Halliwell, B., Gutteridge, J.M.C. & Cross, C.E. 1992. Free radicals, antioxidants, and
Human disease: where are we now? J. Lab. Clin. Med., 119: 598-620.
37. Stadtman, E.R. 1991. Ascorbic acid and oxidative inactivation of proteins. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 54: 1125S-1128S.
38. Arthur, J.R., Bermano, G., Mitchell, J.H. & Hesketh, J.E. 1996. Regulation of
selenoprotein gene expression and thyroid hormone metabolism. Trans. Biochem. Soc.,
24: 384-388.
39. Howie, A.F., Arthur, J.R., Nicol, F., Walker, S.W., Beech, S.G. & Beckett, G.J. 1998.
Identification of a 57-kilodalton selenoprotein in Human thyrocytes as thioredoxin
redctase and evidence that its expression is regulated through the calcium
phosphoinositol-signalling pathway. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 83: in press.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
283
40. Chow, C.K. 1976. Biochemical responses in lungs of ozone-tolerant rats. Nature, 260:
721-722.
41. Aggett, P.J. & Favier, A. 1993. Zinc. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res., 63: 301-307.
42. Alfthan, G., Aro, A., Arvilommi, H. & Huttunen, J.K. 1991. Selenium metabolism and
platelet glutathione peroxidase activity in healthy Finnish men: effects of selenium yeast,
selenite and selenate. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 120-125.
43. Clark, L.C., Combs, G.F.J. & Turnbull, B.W. 1996. Effects of selenium
supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin.  A
randomised controlled trial. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 276: 1957-1963.
44. Willett, W.C., Polk, B.F. & Morris, J.S. 1983. Prediagnostic serum selenium and risk of
cancer. Lancet, ii:130-134.
45. Willett, W.C., Stampfer, M.J., Underwood, B.A., Taylor, J.O. & Hennekens, C.H.
1983. Vitamins A, E and carotene: effects of supplementation on their plasma levels. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr., 38: 559-566.
46. Burton, G.W. & Ingold, K.U. 1981. Autoxidation of biological molecules. 1. The
antioxidant activity of vitamin E and related chain-breaking phenolic antioxidants in vitro.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 103: 6472-6477.
47. Kornbrust, D.J. & Mavis, R.D. 1979. Relative susceptibility of microsomes from lung,
heart, liver, kidney, brain and testes to lipid peroxidation: correlation with vitamin E
content. Lipids, 15:315-322.
48. Wefers, H. & Sies, H. 1988. The protection by ascorbate and glutathione against
microsomal lipid peroxidation is dependent on vitamin E. Eur. J. Biochem., 174: 353-357.
49. McCay, P.B. 1985. Vitamin E: Interactions with free radicals and ascorbate. Annu. Rev.
Nutr., 5:323-340.
50. Sies, H. & Murphy, M.E. 1991. The role of tocopherols in the protection of biological
systems against oxidative damage. Photochem. Photobiol., 8: 211-224.
51. Myllyla, R., Kuutti-Savolainen, E. & Kivirikko, K.I. 1978. The role of ascorbate in the
prolyl hydroxylase reaction. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm., 83: 441-448.
52. Hulse, J.D., Ellis, S.R. & Henderson, L.M. 1978. β-Hydroxylation of trimethyllysine by
an α-ketoglutarate-dependent mitochondrial dioxygenase. J. Biol. Chem., 253:1654-1659.
53. Bates, C.J. 1981. The function and metabolism of vitamin C in man. In: Counsell JN,
Hornig DH, eds. Vitamin C - ascorbic acid. p.1-22. London: Applied Science Publishers. 
54. Zannoni, V.G. & Lynch, M.M. 1973. The role of ascorbic acid in drug metabolism.
Drug Metab. Rev., 2: 57-69.
55. Koskela, T.K., Reiss, G.R., Brubacher, R.F. & Ellefson, R.D. 1989. Is the high
concentrations of ascorbic acid in the eye an adaptation to intense solar irradiation? Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., 30: 2265-2267.
56. Hornig, D.H. 1975. Distribution of ascorbic acid, metabolites and analogues in man and
animals. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci., 258: 103-118.
57. Fraga, C.G., Motchnik, P.A., Shigenaga, M.K., Helbock, H.J., Jacob, R.A. & Ames,
B.N. 1991. Ascorbic acid protects against endogenous oxidative DNA damage in Human
sperm. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 88: 11003-11006.
58. Frei, B. 1991. Ascorbic acid protects lipids in Human plasma and low-density lipoprotein
against oxidative damage. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 1113S-1118S.
59. Rose, R.C. 1989. The ascorbate redox potential of tissues: a determinant or indicator of
disease? NIPS, 4: 190-195.
284
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
60. Weber, P., Bendich, A. & Schalch, W. 1996. Vitamin C and Human health - a review of
recent data relevant to Human requirments. Int. J. Vit. Nutr. Res., 66: 19-30.
61. Tannenbaum, S.R., Wishnok, J.S. & Leaf, C.D. 1991. Inhibition of nitrosamine
formation by ascorbic acid. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 247S-250S.
62. Moser, U. & Weber, F. 1984. Uptake of ascorbic acid by Human granulocytes. Int. J. Vit.
Nutr. Res., 54: 47-53.
63. McGowen, E., Parenti, C.M., Hoidal, J.R. & Niewoehner, D.E. 1984. Ascorbic acid
content and accumulation by alveolar macrophages from cigarette smokers and non-
smokers. J. Lab. Clin. Med., 104: 127-134.
64. Bendich, A. & Olson, J.A. 1989. Biological action of carotenoids. FASEB J.,  3:
1927-1932.
65. Gregory, J.R., Foster, K., Tyler, H. & Wiseman, M. 1990. The dietary and nutritional
survey of British adults. London: HMSO.
66. Chug-ahuja, J.K., Holden, J.M., Forman, M.R., Mangels, A.R., Beecher, G.R. &
Lanza, E. 1993. The development and application of a carotenoid database for fruits,
vegetables, and selected multicomponent foods. J. Am. Diet. Assoc., 93: 318-323.
67. Heinonen, M.I., Ollilainen, V., Linkola, E.K., Varo, P.T. & Koivistoinen, P.E. 1989.
Carotenoids in Finnish Foods: Vegetables, fruits, and berries. .J Agric. Food Chem., 37:
655-659.
68. de Pee, S. & West, C. 1996. Dietary carotenoids and their role in combatting vitamin A
deficiency: a review of the literature. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 50: 38-53.
69. IARC Working Group. 1998. Carotenoids. Lyon: WHO International Agency for
Research on Cancer.
70. Stryker, W.S., Kaplan, L.A., Stein, E.A., Stampfer, M.J., Sober, A. & Willett, W.C.
1988. The relation of diet, cigarette smoking, and alcohol consumption to plasma
beta-carotene and alpha-tocopherol levels. Am. J. Epidemiol., 127: 283-296.
71. Mathews-Roth, M.M., Wilson, T., Fujimore, E. & Krinsky, N.I. 1974. Carotenoid
chromophore length and protection against photosensitization. Photochem Photobiol 19:
217-222.
72. Foote, C.S. & Denny, R.W. 1968. Chemistry of singlet oxygen. VII. Quenching by
β-carotene. Am. Chem. Soc. J., 90: 6233-6235.
73. Di Mascio, P., Kaiser, S. & Sies, H. 1989. Lycopene as the most efficient biological
carotenoid singlet-oxygen quencher. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 274: 532-538.
74. Palozza, P. & Krinsky, N.I. 1992. β-carotene and α-tocopherol are synergistic
antioxidants. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 297: 184-187.
75. Mathews-Roth, M.M. 1986. Systemic photoprotection. Derm. Clin., 4: 335-339.
76. Mathews-Roth, M.M., Pathak, M.A., Fitzpatrick, T.B., Harber, L.C. & Kass, E.H.
1977. Beta-carotene therapy for erythropoietic protoporphyria and other photosensitive
diseases. Arch. Dermatol., 113: 1229-1232.
77. Greenberg, E.R., Baron, J.A. & Stukel, T.A. 1990. A clinical trial of beta carotene to
prevent basal-cell and squamous-cell cancers of the skin. N. Engl. J. Med., 323: 789-795.
78. Bone, R.A., Landrum, J.T., Fernandez, L. & Tarsis, S.L. 1988.   Analysis of macula
pigment by HPLC: Retinal distribution and age study. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
29:843-849
79. Gerster, H. 1991. Antioxidant protection of the ageing macula. Age Ageing,  20: 60-69.
FAO/WHO expert consultation on human vitamin and mineral requirements
285
80. Seddon, A.M., Ajani, U.A. & Sperduto, R.D. 1994. Dietary carotenoids, vitamin A, C,
and E, and advanced age-related macular degeneration. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 272:
1413-1420.
81. Terao, J. 1989. Antioxidant activity of β-carotene-related carotenoids in solution. Lipids
24: 659-661.
82. Chopra, M. & Thurnham, D.I. 1993. In vitro antioxidant activity of lutein. In: Waldron
KW, Johnson IT, Fenwick GR, eds. Food and cancer prevention. p.123-129. London:
Royal Society of Chemistry.
83. Edge, R., McGarvey, D.J. & Truscott, T.G. 1997. The carotenoids as anti-oxidants. J
Photochem. Photobiol. B:Biol., 41: 189-200.
84. Bendich, A. 1989. Carotenoids and the immune response. J. Nutr., 119: 112-115.
85. Pool-Zobel, B.L., Bub, A., Muller, H., Wollowski, I. & Rechkemmer, G. 1997.
Consumption of vegetables reduces genetic damage in Humans: first results of a Human
intervention trial with carotenoid-rich foods. Carcinogenesis, 18: 847-1850.
86. van Anterwerpen, V.L., Theron, A.J. & Richards, G.A. 1995. Plasma levels of
beta-carotene are inversely correlated with circulating neutrophil counts in young male
cigarette smokers. Inflammation, 19: 405-414.
87. Daudu, P.A., Kelley, D.S., Taylor,P.C., Burri, B.J. & Wu, M.M. 1994. Effect of low
β-carotene diet on the immune functions of adult women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 60: 969-972.
88. Krinsky, N.I. 1988. The evidence for the role of carotenoids in preventive health. Clin.
Nutr., 7: 107-112.
89. Colditz, G.A., Branch, L.G. & Lipnick, R.J. 1985. Increased green and yellow
vegetable intake and lowered cancer deaths in an elderly population. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
41: 32-36.
90. National Academy of Sciences. 1989. Diet and Health. Implications for reducing chronic
disease. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
91. Sann, L., Bienvenu, J., Lahet, C., Divry, P., Cotte, J. & Bethenod, M. 1981. Serum
orosomucoid concentration in newborn infants. Eur. J. Pediatr., 136: 181-185.
92. Kelly, F.J., Rodgers, W., Handel, J., Smith, S. & Hall, M.A. 1990. Time course of
vitamin E repletion in the premature infant. Br. J. Nutr., 63: 631-638.
93. Moison, R.M.W,, Palinckx, J.J.S., Roest,M., Houdkamp, E. & Berger, H.M. 1993
Induction of lipid peroxidation by pulmonary surfactant by plasma of preterm babies.
Lancet, 341: 79-82.
94. Omenn, G.S., Goodman, G.E. & Thornquist, M.D. 1996. Effects of a combination of
beta carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer and cardiovascular disease. N. Engl. J. Med.,
334: 1150-1155.
95. Rapola, J.M., Virtamo, J., Ripatti, S., Huttunen, J.K., Albanes, D. & Taylor, P.R.
1997. Randomised trial of α-tocopherol and β-carotene supplements on incidence of
major coronary events in men with previous myocardial infarction. Lancet, 349:
1715-1720.
96. Greenberg, E.R., Baron, J.A. & Tosteson, T.D. 1994. A clinical trial of antioxidant
vitamins to prevent colorectal adenoma. N. Engl. J. Med., 331: 141-147.
97. Stich, H.F., Rosin, M.P., Hornby, A.P., Mathew, B., Sankaranarayanan, R. &
Krishnan Nair, M. 1988. Remission of oral leukoplakias and micronuclei in
tobacco/betel quid chewers treated with beta-carotene and with beta-carotene plus vitamin
A. Int. J. Cancer, 42: 195-199.
286
Chapter 17: Dietary antioxidants
98.   Stich, H.F., Hornby, P. & Dunn, B.P. 1985. A pilot beta-carotene intervention trial
with inuits using smokeless tobacco. Int. J. Cancer, 36: 321-327.
99.   Blot, W.J., Li, J-Y. & Taylor, P.R. 1993. Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian,
China: supplementation with specific vitamin/mineral combinations, cancer incidence,
and disease specific mortality in the general population.. J Natl Cancer Inst., 85:
1483-1492.
100. Stephens, N.G., Parsons, A., Schofield, P.M., Kelly, F., Cheeseman, K. &
Mitchinson, M.J. 1996. Randomised control trial of vitamin E in patients with
coronary disease: Cambridge Heart Antioxidant Study (CHAOS). Lancet, 347: 781-786.
101. Mitchinson, M.J., Stephens, N.G., Parsons, A., Bligh, E., Schofield, P.M. & Brown,
M.J. 1999. Mortality  in the CHAOS trial. Lancet, 353: 381-382.
Premature
30 (p) µg/kg/day
15 (p)µg/kg/day
Males 10 - 18 years
1,300 (d)
250
34
5.7
9.7
19.2
10 (10-14 yrs)
12 (10-14 yrs)
15 (10-14 yrs)
29 (10-14 yrs)
135 (10-11 yrs)
12 (15-18 yrs)
16 (15-18 yrs)
19 (15-18 yrs)
38 (15-18 yrs)
110 (12 + yrs)
Age
mg/day
mg/day
µg/day
mg/day
mg/day
mg/day
mg/day
mg/day
mg/day
mg/day
µg/day
Calcium
Magnesium
Selenium
Zinc
Iron  (i)
Iodine
135
1-3 years 
500 
60 
17 
2.4 
4.1 
8.4 
4 
5 
6 
12 
75
4-6 years
600
73
21
3.1
5.1
10.3
4
5
6
13
110
7-9 years
700
100
21
3.3
5.6
11.3
6
7
9
18
100
15%
bio-availability
12%
bio-availability
10%
bio-availability
5%
bio-availability
(o)
APPENDIX 1
[19]  (l)
(k)
[9]  (l)
(k)
[8]  (l)
(k)
Table 1      
Recommended nutrient intakes – minerals*
[6]  (l)
(k)
bioavail
-ability
8.3 (h)
6.6 (g)
Low
Moderate
bioavail-
ability
4.1 (h)
2.8 (f)
bioavail-
ability
0.8 (e)
2.5 (h)
1.1 (e)
(c)
High
10
6
26 (a)
36 (b)
53
300 (a)
400 (b)
400
7-11 months
0 - 6 months
Adolescents
Children
Infants
140 (10-11 yrs)
100 (12 + yrs)
Males 19 - 65 years
1,000
260
34
4.2
7.0
14.0
9
11
14
27
130
(pre-menopausal)
1,000
220
26
3.0
4.9
9.8
20
24
29
59
110
(menopausal) 
1,300
220
26
3.0
4.9
9.8
8
9
11
23
110
Females 65 + years
1,300
1,300
230
190
34
26
4.2
3.0
7.0
4.9
14.0
9.8
9
8
11
9
14
11
27
23
130
110
200
200
200
200
200
200
* For the purposes of the composite tables of RNI values, the body weights used were derived from the 50th percentile of NCHS data until adult weights of 55 kg for females and 65 kg for males were reached.  The weights used are
the following:  0-6 mo = 6 kg; 7–12 mo = 8.9 kg; 1-3 yo = 12.1 kg; 4-6 yo = 18.2 kg; 7-9 yo = 25.2 kg; 10-11 yo M = 33.4 kg; 10-11 yo F = 34.8 kg; 12-18 yo M = 55.1 kg; 12-18 yo F = 50.6 kg; 10-18 yo M = 55.1 kg; 10-18 yo F
28 (10-14 yrs) (m)
65 (10-14 yrs)
62 (15-18 yrs)
(n)
(n)
(n)
30
30
30
14 (10-14 yrs) (m)
33 (10-14 yrs)
31 (15-18 yrs)
(n)
(n)
(n)
15
15
15
12 (10-14 yrs) (m)
28 (10-14 yrs)
26 (15-18 yrs)
(n)
(n)
(n)
12
12
12
Females 10 - 18 years
1,300 (d)
230
26
4.6
7.8
15.5
9 (10-14 yrs) (m)
22 (10-14 yrs)
21 (15-18 yrs)
(n)
(n)
(n)
10
10
10
11.0
14.0
20.0
19.0
17.5
14.4
5.5
7.0
10.0
9.5
8.8
7.2
3.4
4.2
6.0
5.8
5.3
4.3
220
220
220
28
30
35
35
42
270
270
270
= 50.6 kg; 19-65 yo M = 65 kg; 19-65 yo F = 55 kg
Third trimester
1,200
1,000
1,000
1,000
Males 65 + years
Second trimester
19 - 50 years
51 - 65 years
First trimester
0-3 months
4-6 months
7-12 months
Older adults
Pregnancy
Females
Lactation
Adults
(i)
There is evidence that iron absorption can be significantly enhanced when each meal contains a minimum of 25 mg of Vitamin C, assuming three meals per day.
(c)
The data used in developing calcium RNIs originate from developed countries, and there is controversy as to their appropriateness for developing countries. This
(g)
Formula-fed infants, low zinc bio-availability due to infant consumption of phytate rich cereals and vegetable protein based formula.
notion also holds true for most nutrients, but based on current knowledge, the impact appears to be most marked for calcium.
This is especially true if there are iron absorption inhibitors in the diet such as phytate or tannins.
(h)
Not applicable to infants consuming human milk only.
(f)
Formula-fed infants, moderate zinc bio-availability.
(d)
Particularly during the growth spurt.
(e)
Human-milk fed infants only.
(a)
Human breast milk.
Notes - Minerals
(b)
Infant formula.
Calcium:
Zinc:
Iron:
(n)
It is recommended that iron supplements in tablet form be given to all pregnant women because of the difficulties in correctly evaluating iron status in pregnancy.
(k)
Neonatal iron stores are sufficient to meet the iron requirement for the first six months in full term infants. Premature infants and low birth weight infants require
In the non-anaemic pregnant woman, daily supplements of 100 mg of iron (e.g., as ferrous sulphate) given during the second half of pregnancy are adequate. In
(NCHS data source: WHO, Measuring Change in Nutritional Status. Guidelines for Assessing the Nutritional Impact of Supplementary Feeding Programmes for
adolescents and adults 12 + years  =  2 µg/kg/day
pregnancy and lactation  =  3.5 µg/kg/day
(p)
In view of the high variability in body weights at these ages the RNIs are expressed as µg/kg body weight/day.
premature infants  =  30 µg/kg/day
infants 0-12 months  =  19 µg/kg/day
children 1 - 6 years  =  6 µg/kg/day
children 7 - 11  =  4 µg/kg/day
(o)
Data expressed on a per kg body weight basis is sometimes preferred, and this data is as follows:
(l)
Bio-availability of dietary iron during this period varies greatly.
anaemic women higher doses are usually required.
Vulnerable Groups, World Health Organization, 1983)
(m)
Non-menstruating adolescents.
additional iron.
Iodine
Age
mg/day
mg/day
mg NE/day
mg/day
mg/day
µg/day
µg DFE/day
µg/day
mg/day
µg RE/day
µg/day
mg-TE/ day
µg/day
intakes) (h)
Vit.  K
Females
1.2
1.1
1.3
1.0
16
16
1.3
1.2
5
5
25
25
400
400
2.4
2.4
40
40
600
600
5
5
10
7.5
35-65
35-55
7-11 months
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
2 (b)
4
0.1
0.3
1.7
1.8
5
6
80
80
0.4
0.5
25
30
375
400
5
5
2.7 (i)
2.7 (i)
5 (m)
10
(l)
1-3 years
0.5
0.5
6
0.5
2
8
160
0.9
30
400
5
5 (k)
15
    4-6 years
0.6
0.6
8
0.6
3
12
200
1.2
30
450
5
5 (k)
20
    7-9 years
0.9
0.9
12
1.0
4
20
300
1.8
35
500
5
7 (k)
25
19 - 65 years
1.2
1.3
16
1.3 (19-50 yrs)
1.7 (50 + yrs)
5
30
400
2.4
45
600
5 (19-50 yrs)
10 (50 + yrs)
10
65
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - WATER-SOLUBLE VITAMINS - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - -  - - FAT-SOLUBLE VITAMINS - - - - -
(acceptable
(f) (g)
Vit.  D
Vit.  E
(d)
Vit.  A
Table 2    
Recommended nutrient intakes (g) (h)  –  water and fat soluble vitamins*
(c)
Vit. B12
Vit.  C
thenate
Biotin
Folate
(a)
Vit.  B6
Panto-
Thiamin
Riboflavin
Niacin
0 - 6 months
Adolescents
10-18 years
Females
Children
Males
Males
Infants
Adults
(pre- menopausal)
1.1
1.1
14
1.3
5
30
400
2.4
45
500
5
7.5
55
(menopausal)
1.1
1.1
14
1.5
5
30
400
2.4
45
500
10
7.5
55
Males
1.2
1.3
16
1.7
5
400
2.4
45
600
15
10
65
     Females
1.1
1.1
14
1.5
5
400
2.4
45
600
15
7.5
55
Pregnancy
1.4
1.4
18
1.9
6
30
600
2.6
55
800
5
(i)
55
Lactation
1.5
1.6
17
2.0
7
35
500
2.8
70 (e)
850
5
(i)
55
* For the purposes of these composite tables of RNI values, the body weights used were derived from the 50th percentile of NCHS data until adult weights of 55 kg for females and 65 kg for males were reached.  The weights
used are the following:  0-6 mo = 6 kg; 7–12 mo = 8.9 kg; 1-3 yo = 12.1 kg; 4-6 yo = 18.2 kg; 7-9 yo = 25.2 kg; 10-11 yo M = 33.4 kg; 10-11 yo F = 34.8 kg; 12-18 yo M = 55.1 kg; 12-18 yo F = 50.6 kg; 10-18 yo M = 55.1
kg; 10-18 yo F = 50.6 kg; 19-65 yo M = 65 kg; 19-65 yo F = 55 kg
Older adults,
51-65 years
19-50 years
65  +  years
(f)
Vitamin A values are "recommended safe intakes" instead of RNIs.  This level of intake is set to prevent clinical signs of deficiency, allow normal growth, but does
(d)
An RNI of 45 mg was calculated for adult men and women and 55 mg recommended during pregnancy.   It is recognised however that larger amounts would
(g)
Recommended safe intakes as µg RE/day; 1 µg retinol=1 µg RE; 1 µg β-carotene=0.167 µg RE; 1 µg other provitamin A carotenoids=0.084 µg RE.
(c) 
DFE = dietary folate equivalents; µg of DFE provided = [µg of food folate + (1.7 x µg of synthetic folic acid)].
(a)
NE = niacin equivalents, 60-to-1 conversion factor for tryptophan to niacin.
not allow for prolonged periods of infections or other stresses.
promote greater iron absorption if this can be achieved.
(e)
An additional 25 mg is needed for lactation.
(b)
Preformed niacin.
Notes - Vitamins
Vitamin A:
Vitamin C
Folate
Niacin
(m) This intake cannot be met by infants who are exclusively breast-fed. To prevent bleeding due to vitamin K deficiency, all breast fed babies should receive vitamin K
(h)
Data were considered insufficient to formulate recommendations for this vitamin so that "acceptable intakes" are listed instead.  This represents the best estimate of
mg α-tocopherol equivalents (TE)/100 ml of reconstituted product, and not less than 0.4 mg TE/g PUFA.  Human breast milk vitamin E is fairly constant at 2.7 mg
pregnancy and lactation is expected to compensate for increased need for infant growth and milk synthesis. Breast milk substitutes should not contain less than 0.3
(i)
For pregnancy and lactation there is no evidence of requirements for vitamin E that are any different from those of older adults. Increased energy intake during
(NCHS data source: WHO, Measuring Change in Nutritional Status. Guidelines for Assessing the Nutritional Impact of Supplementary Feeding Programmes for
(l) 
The RNI for each age group is based on a daily intake of 1 µg/kg/day of phylloquinone, the latter being the major dietary source of Vitamin K.
requirements, based on the currently acceptable intakes that support the known function of this vitamin.
supplementation at birth according to nationally approved guidelines.
(k)
Values based on a proportion of the adult acceptable intakes.
Vulnerable Groups, World Health Organization, 1983)
for 850 ml of milk.
Vitamin K:
Vitamin E: