NUTRITION 
GUIDE
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
2018
The 2018 edition of this guidance  has been revised and extensively reformatted for  ease of use. The 
revisions to content from the 2015 version, in the pre-designed format, can be found on the USDA 
FNS Summer Food Service Program web page at: http://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/handbooks
In addition, throughout the text, references have been made to memoranda issued by the Food 
and Nutrition Service. The numbering system may differ from your State Agency.
In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights 
regulations and policies, the USDA, its Agencies, offices, and employees, and institutions participating 
in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national  
origin, sex, disability, age, or reprisal or  retaliation for  prior  civil rights activity in any program or  
activity conducted or funded by USDA.
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information 
(e.g. Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign  Language, etc.), should  contact the Agency (State 
or local) where they applied for benefits. Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech 
disabilities may contact USDA through t he Federal Relay Service at (800) 8 77-8339. Additionally, 
program information  may be made available in  languages other than  English.
To file a program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form, (AD-3027) found online at: http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, and at any 
USDA office, or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information 
requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992.
Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by:
MAIL: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights 
1400  Independence Avenue, SW 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410
FAX: 
(202) 690-7442
EMAIL: 
program.intake@usda.gov
This institution is an equal opportunity provider 
REVISED MAY 2018
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
2
CONTENTS
PART ONE:
PLANNING QUALITY MEALS
Understanding Meal Pattern 
Requirements
Making the Most of 
Summer Meals
Getting Organized: 
Food Purchasing and 
Receiving Food
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Introduction
7 
Dietary Guidelines for Americans
7 
Food Safety
9 
SFSP Meal Pattern Requirements
12 
Food Components
16 
Serving Additional Foods
17 
Crediting Foods
18 
Meal Modifications
20 
Documenting Meals
22 
Summer Menu Planning: The Basics
23 
How to Build a Healthy Plate
32 
Incorporating Local Foods
33 
Creating a Cycle Menu
34 
Sample Cycle Lunch Menus
36 
Summer Menu Ideas
38 
Affordable, Healthy Meals
40 
Sample Recipes
43 
Meal Service Options
48 
Staying on Budget
49 
Purchasing Food
53 
Purchasing Local Foods
54 
Receiving Food
55 
Menu Production Records
3
Setting the Standard: Food 
Service Quality
Education and Enrichment 
62 
Introducing New Foods
Questions and Answers 
71
PART TWO:
FOOD SAFETY
Take Precautions: Food Safety 
74 
Importance of Food Safety
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
57 
Food Preparation
58 
Using Standardized and Quantity Recipes
60 
Serving Utensils
60 
Food Service
64 
Creating a Positive Eating Environment
66 
Nutrition Education
67 
Local Food Activities
68 
Promoting Physical Activity
70 
Spotlight on Summer Food Service Programs
75 
Good Personal Hygiene
77 
Food Safety Temperatures
82 
Cleaning and Sanitizing
83 
Microwave Cooking
83 
Traditional and Locally Grown Foods
84 
What You Should Do if a Child Becomes Sick
4
Keep Food Fresh: Food Storage 
and Sanitation
Sample Food Safety Checklist 
89
Questions and Answers
Reference Section
Resource Section
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
86 
Food Storage
87 
Food Sanitation
95
97 
Sample Summer Menu Checklist
98 
Exhibit A: Grain Requirements for Child
Nutrition Programs
101 
Choking Risks
103 
How to Read Nutrition Labels
105 
Serving Sizes and Yields for Vegetables
106 
Serving Sizes and Yields for Fruits
108 
Keep These Food Safety Rules in Mind
109 
Food Service Equipment Needs
110 
Sample Food Inventory Record
111 
Food Inventory Record Instructions
112 
Sample Specification Bid
113 
Sample Daily Temperature Form 
Internal
Food Temperatures
114 
Storage Temperature Form
116 
Informational Resources
117 
Additional Resources
119 
Food and Nutrition Service Regional Offices
120 
State Contact Information
5
INTRODUCTION
The Summer Food Service Program (SFSP) offers an opportunity to positively impact children’s lives. 
The Program was established to ensure children continue to receive healthy meals when school is not 
in session. Meals served at s ummer sites play an important r ole in a lleviating food insecurity and 
hunger in t hose children m
 ost in need  when s chool meals are not available.
Summer sites play a valuable role in helping children learn, grow, and stay healthy. By offering nutritious meals at 
summer sites, children receive more of the vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients they need. Additionally, 
children will learn how to build a healthy plate and establish lifelong healthy eating habits.
All meals served in SFSP must meet certain requirements in order to receive reimbursement. These meal pattern 
requirements are designed to help the menu planner provide well-balanced, healthy meals that meet the 
nutritional and  energy needs of children. FNS strongly encourages  sponsors take additional steps toward serving 
more nutritious  and appealing meals  at their summer sites. The Summer Food Service Program for Children: 2018 
Nutrition Guide for Sponsors was developed to help sponsors plan and serve menus with a variety of nutrient-rich 
foods and beverages, and operate a safe and successful food service. This resource, designed primarily for 
sponsors  who prepare meals  on-site or in a central kitchen, offers guidance on:
• 
Menu planning, including sample breakfast, lunch and snack menus 
• 
Nutrition information; 
• 
Record-keeping requirements; 
• 
Food  purchasing and  storage; and 
• 
Food safety and sanitation.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
6
DIETARY GUIDELINES 
FOR AMERICANS
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans (Dietary Guidelines), jointly developed by the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), is the Nation’s primary source 
for nutrition advice. Published every five years, the Dietary Guidelines provide recommendations to  help 
Americans ages 2 years and older make healthy food and beverage choices to ensure a nutritionally adequate 
diet. These recommendations are the basis for the nutrition guidance in this publication.
Sponsors should, as much as possible, purchase and serve foods that align with the recommendations in the 
Dietary Guidelines, such as serving more nutrient-dense foods like whole grains, vegetables and fruit, and fewer 
foods high in sodium, added sugars, and added solid fats. To review or download a copy of  the most recent 
Dietary Guidelines, visit: http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/.
MyPlate is an icon designed to  remind people to  make healthier  food choices based on Dietary Guidelines 
recommendations. Visit the MyPlate website here:  http://www.choosemyplate.gov/. Along with MyPlate, USDA  
has many resources including tip sheets, videos, and recipes sponsors can use to develop menus containing the  
nutrients children  need  to grow and be healthy. Links and  descriptions of many of those resources are provided  
throughout  this Guide.
FOOD SAFETY
Along with serving nutritious meals, it is crucial to serve safe meals. This Guide recommends food safety 
practices that apply to both  institutional and non-institutional settings, such as at parks and recreation centers 
and libraries, where  many summer meals are served. This Guide also includes information found in the USDA’s 
Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS)  Food Safety Education materials for food preparation  in  non-
institutional settings.
NOTE: Please keep in mind that Sponsors must be familiar with and follow State 
and local public health requirements and State agency policies and procedures.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
7
UNDERSTANDING MEAL 
PATTERN REQUIREMENTS 
 PART ONE: PLANNING 
QUALITY MEALS
•  SFSP MEAL PATTERN REQUIREMENTS
•  FOOD COMPONENTS
•  SERVING ADDITIONAL FOODS
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
•  CREDITING FOODS
•  MEAL MODIFICATIONS
•  DOCUMENTING MEALS
8
SFSP MEAL PATTERN 
REQUIREMENTS
The SFSP meal patterns  enable  sponsors to serve meals that are  appealing and are  consistent 
with the Dietary Guidelines.
The meal patterns at 7 CFR 225.16(d) outline the required food components and their  minimum serving sizes in 
order f or t he meal to be eligible for r eimbursement.  A food component is one of the food groups that comprise a 
reimbursable meal.  For  example, a fruit or  vegetable and a meat or  meat alternate would be a food component.  A 
food item is a specific food offered within the food component. For example, a  ½ cup serving of peaches and a  ½ 
cup serving of pears are two food items in the fruit and vegetable component. The meal patterns chart on page 11 
shows the required food components  and the minimum required serving sizes  of each food component for 
breakfast, lunch, supper, and snacks.
Age Appropriate Meal Patterns
The SFSP meal patterns were designed for children ages 6 through 12 years old. Therefore, the SFSP meal pattern 
minimum  serving sizes may not be suitable for all children attending the summer site. Active teenagers may need 
more food than younger children and may feel that the portion sizes are too small. Conversely, for  children 
younger than 6 years old, the serving sizes may  be too big. In these situations, sponsors may  be approved to serve 
more age-appropriate portion sizes.
Meals for Children ages 12 through 18:  Because teenagers have greater food needs, sponsors may serve larger 
serving sizes than the minimum serving sizes specified in the SFSP meal pattern. There is no maximum serving size 
in the SFSP meal  patterns. Sponsors serving teenagers may also choose  to follow the adult meal patterns found in 
the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) (7 CFR 226.20(c)), which has larger portion sizes than the SFSP 
meal patterns. Additionally, extra foods (foods served in addition to the minimum portion sizes to meet the meal 
pattern  requirements)  may always be served to improve the nutritional status of participating children. However, 
meals containing additional foods or larger portion sizes than the minimum required serving size are reimbursed at 
the same reimbursement rate as regular SFSP meals.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
9
Meals for Children Under 6 Years Old: State agencies 
may authorize sponsors to follow the CACFP meal 
pattern  requirements (7 CFR 226.20)  for children 
under six years old, which  include smaller serving sizes 
than are indicated in the SFSP meal pattern. The 
sponsor must be able to ensure that each age group is  
receiving the appropriate minimum serving sizes 
indicated in the CACFP meal  pattern. Food should 
always be of a  texture and a consistency that is 
appropriate for the age and development of the 
children being served. For example, fruit should be cut 
into smaller pieces so that it is easier for younger 
children to eat.
Infants: A  sponsor must receive State agency approval 
prior to serving meals to infants (birth  through  11 
months of age) (7 CFR 225.16(f)(2)). Once approved to 
serve meals to infants, sponsors  must follow  the 
CACFP infant meal pattern requirements (7 CFR 
226.20(b)).
School Food Authorities (SFAs)  participating in the 
Seamless Summer Option (SSO) are required to follow 
the NSLP meal pattern requirements, not  the SFSP 
meal pattern requirements. However, SFAs operating 
the SSO at open and restricted open sites that  are 
having difficulty implementing the NSLP meal pattern  
for each age/grade group may work with their State 
agency to make accommodations. For example, the 
State agency may approve the SFA to follow the meal  
pattern requirements for a single age/grade group. 
This flexibility increases the ability of SFAs with a wide 
age range of children attending their site to more 
easily participate  in SSO while still meeting the meal 
pattern requirements. Refer to SP 09-2017, 2017
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Edition of Questions and Answers for the National School 
Lunch Program’s Seamless Summer Option https://fns-
prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/cn/SP09-
2017os_reissue.pdf for more information.
SFAs participating in the SFSP (rather than the SSO)  may 
choose to follow the SFSP meal patterns or the NSLP or 
School Breakfast Program (SBP)  meal patterns
(7 CFR 225.16(f)(1)(i)) as applicable. SFAs may begin 
following the NSLP or SBP meal pattern requirements at 
any time during the year. If an SFA chooses to make this 
switch, the SFA must notify its  State agency, but the SFA 
does not need  prior approval. This flexibility allows SFAs 
to seamlessly continue implementation 
of  the NSLP or SBP meal pattern requirements year-
round.
Sponsors should refer to the SFSP Administrative 
Guidance  for Sponsors for more details, or contact their 
State agency that administers the SFSP. SFSP sites 
choosing to follow the meal  pattern requirements of 
another Child Nutrition Program must follow all of that 
Program’s meal pattern service requirements.
CACFP MEAL PATTERNS: Sponsors that choose to 
follow the CACFP meal patterns need to be aware 
that the CACFP meal pattern requirements were 
recently updated. The updated CACFP meal pattern 
requirements went into  effect on October 1, 2017. 
SFSP sponsors following the CACFP meal pattern 
requirements must comply with the updated CACFP 
meal patterns starting Summer 2018. For more 
information on the updated CACFP meal  patterns, 
please visit: http://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/meals-
and-snacks.
10
SUMMER FOOD SERVICE PROGRAM MEAL PATTERNS
Fluid milk  (whole, low-fat, or fat-free)
Vegetable or fruit or 
½ cup 
¾  cup total4 
¾  cup
Full-strength vegetable or  fruit juice 
½ cup (4 fluid ounces) 
¾  cup (6 fluid ounces)5
Bread  or 
1slice 
1slice 
1slice
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls, muffins, etc. or 
1 serving7 
1 serving7 
1 serving7
Cold dry cereal or 
¾  cup or 1 ounce8 
¾  cup or 1 ounce8
Cooked cereal or cereal grains or 
½ cup 
½ cup 
½ cup
Cooked pasta or noodle  products 
½ cup 
½ cup 
½ cup
Lean meat or poultry or fish or 
1ounce 
2  ounces 
1  ounce
9 
or 
1ounce 
2  ounces 
1  ounce
Alternate protein products
Cheese  or 
1ounce 
2  ounces 
1  ounce
Egg  (large) or 
½ 
1 
½
Cooked dry beans or peas or 
¼  cup 
½  cup1 
¼  cup1
Peanut or other nut or seed butters or 
2 tablespoons 
4 tablespoons 
2 tablespoons
10 
or 
1 ounce=50%11 
1 ounce
Nuts or seeds
12 
4  ounces or ½ cup 
8  ounces or 1  cup 
4  ounces or ½ cup
Yogurt
1  For the purposes of the requirement outlined in this table, a cup means a 
standard measuring cup 
2 Served as a beverage or on cereal or used in part for each purpose 
3 Served as a beverage 
4 Serve two or more kinds of vegetable or fruits or a combination of both.  
Full strength vegetable or fruit juice may be counted to meet not more than 
one-half of this requirement 
5 Juice may not be served when milk is served as the only other component 
6 Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains (such as rice, bulgur, or 
corn grits) shall  be whole-grain or enriched. Cornbread, biscuits, rolls, 
muffins, etc, shall be made with whole-grain or enriched meal or flour. Cereal 
shall be whole-grain, enriched,  or fortified
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
7 Serving sizes and equivalents will be in guidance materials to be distributed 
by FNS to State agencies 
8 Either volume (cup) or weight (ounces), whichever is less 
9 Must meet the requirements of 7 CFR 225 Appendix A 
10 Tree nuts and seeds that may be used as meat alternate are listed in 
program guidance 
11 No more than 50 percent of the requirement shall be met with nuts or 
seeds. Nuts  or seeds  shall be combined with another meat/meat 
alternate to fulfill the requirement. For purposes of determining 
combinations, one ounce of nuts or seeds  is  equal  to one ounce of cooked 
lean meat, poultry or fish 
12 Plain or flavored, unsweetened or sweetened
11
8  fluid  ounces)2
Food Components
This section includes additional information about the meal pattern requirements in the SFSP. 
Sponsors will find information on the required food components, including examples of food items 
within each component and guidance on acceptable types and quantities of food items that may be 
used  to meet meal pattern  requirements.
For nutrition information and tips on creating well-balanced meals,
see Making the Most of Summer Meals in this Guidance.
MILK
Allowable food items:
• 
Pasteurized,  unflavored or flavored whole milk, reduced-fat milk, low-fat milk, fat-free 
milk, buttermilk, lactose-reduced milk, or acidophilus milk. 
• 
See Substitutions and Exceptions in this Guide for information on milk substitutes.
Guidelines:
• 
At breakfast or snack, milk can be served as a beverage or on cereal, or a combination 
of both. 
• 
At lunch or supper, milk must be served as a beverage. 
• 
In Alaska, Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands of the United States, if a 
sufficient supply of such types of fluid milk cannot be obtained, reconstituted or 
recombined milk may be used. All milk should contain Vitamins A and D at the  levels 
specified by the Food and Drug Administration and at levels  consistent with State and 
local standards for such milk.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
12
•
Dark green: bok choy, broccoli, collard greens, dark-green leafy lettuce, kale, spinach
•
Red and orange: carrots, pumpkin, red peppers, butternut squash, sweet potatoes,
tomatoes
•
Starchy: corn, green peas, potatoes
•
Dry beans and peas: black beans, black-eyed peas, chickpeas, kidney beans, lentils
•
Other: green beans, artichokes, avocados, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, cucumbers
•
Full strength (100%) vegetable juice
Fruits, such as:
•
Apples, bananas, blackberries, cantaloupe, grapes, kiwi, mangoes, oranges, pears,
pineapple, plums, raspberries, strawberries, watermelon
•
Full strength (100%) fruit juice
Guidelines:
•
At breakfast, a serving of fruit, vegetable, or full-strength (100%) juice, or an equivalent 
quantity in any combination, is required.
•
For lunch or supper, serve two or more kinds of  vegetables and/or  fruits. Up to  one-half of 
the vegetable/fruit requirement may be met with full-strength (100%) juice.
•
Cooked vegetables means a serving of drained cooked vegetables.
•
Cooked or canned fruit means a serving of fruit including the juice the fruit is packed in.
•
Thawed frozen fruit includes fruit and the thawed juice;
•
Dry beans and peas cannot be credited as both a vegetable and meat/meat alternate within 
the same meal.
•
Dried fruits, such as dried apricots, raisins, and prunes, may be used to meet 
requirements. Dried fruit is credited based on volume served (𝟏,𝟒 cup dried fruit = 𝟏,4 cup 
fruit).
•
Fruit sold within commercially prepared yogurt, whether blended, mixed, or on top, cannot 
be credited toward  the fruit requirement. Extra fruit provided as a separate component can 
be credited.
•
Small amounts of onions, pickles, relish, ketchup, jams or jellies, or other condiments may 
be added as additional foods for flavor or garnish. However, these do not count towards the 
fruit and vegetable requirement.
•
Serve a variety of fruit or vegetables. Serving two forms of the same fruit or vegetable in 
the same meal (for example: an orange and orange juice, or an apple and applesauce) is not 
allowable. The two vegetables and/or fruit served  at lunch and supper meals must be 
different from each other.
Juice:
•
Full-strength (100%) fruit or vegetable juice may not be served as part of a  reimbursable 
snack if milk is t he only other component served. 
•
Juice or syrup from canned fruit does not count as fruit juice.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
13
Enriched grains, such as:
• 
Bagels, cereal (ready-to-eat), cornbread, muffins, crackers, tortillas, noodles or  pasta, 
pita bread, rolls, white bread; 
• 
Enriched rice; 
• 
Enriched or fortified cereal.
Guidelines:
• 
Grains and breads must be  whole-grain or enriched, or made from whole-grain or 
enriched flour or meal; ready-to-eat cereals must be whole-grain, enriched, or fortified. 
• 
Enriched macaroni products fortified with protein may count towards either the grains 
component or the meat/meat alternate component, but not as both in the same meal. 
• 
Piecrust used as part of the main dish (i.e., for meat turnovers or meat pies) is allowed  
as a grain item. 
• 
Non-sweet snack foods such as hard pretzels, hard bread sticks, and chips made from 
whole-grain or enriched meal or flour can be used to meet the grain requirement. 
• 
Choose whole grains and whole-grain products when possible to provide additional  
vitamins, minerals, and fiber; see How to Build a Healthy Plate in this guide for more 
information on identifying and serving healthy whole-grain products.
MEAT AND MEAT ALTERNATES
Allowable food items:
Meat, fish, poultry, and eggs such as:
•
Beef, chicken, fish, ham, pork, turkey, eggs
Cheese, such as:
•
American, cheddar, cottage, mozzarella, Parmesan, ricotta, Swiss
Beans and peas, such as:
•
Black  beans, black-eyed peas, chickpeas, kidney beans, lentils, pinto beans, 
refried beans, fresh soybeans (edamame).
Nuts and seeds, such as:
•
Almonds, cashews, hazelnuts, peanuts, pecans, pumpkin seeds, sesame seeds, sunflower 
seeds, walnuts, soy nuts; 
•
Nut /seed butters: almond, peanut, sunflower, soy nut butter, etc.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
14
Yogurt:
•  Commercially produced yogurt: 
•  Plain or flavored 
•  Unsweetened or sweetened 
•  Whole-fat, low-fat, or fat-free
Alternate protein product (APP): 
Mixed or made into food items, such as:
•  Burger patties 
•  Meat loaf 
•  Tuna salad 
•  Chicken nuggets 
•  Pizza toppings
Guidelines:
•  Meat or meat alternates must be served at lunch and supper. 
•  Meat or meat alternates may be served as part of a snack  or as an additional item at breakfast. 
•  Dry beans and peas cannot be credited as both a vegetable and meat/meat alternate within the 
same meal. 
•  Meats/meat alternates with APPs should be accompanied by a CN label or have a Product 
Formulation Statement. Prior to being added to other products, APPs must meet the specific 
standards. Before using products containing APP and claiming the meals for reimbursement, 
contact your State agency or your sponsoring organization.
Nuts and seeds 
•  Nuts and seeds may fulfill the entire meat/meat alternate requirement  for snack, and up  
to half of the required meat/meat  alternate requirement  for lunch or supper.  
•  When combining nuts and seeds with another meat/meat alternate to fulfill the lunch or  
supper requirement, 1 oz. of nuts or seeds is  equal to 1 oz. of cooked lean meat, poultry,  
or  fish.  
•  Children under 4 years old are at the highest risk of choking; nuts and seeds should only 
be served to young children ground or finely chopped  in  a prepared food, and  nut/seed butters 
should be spread thinly on bread or crackers.
Yogurt 
•  For snack, 4 oz. or  ½  cup of plain, sweetened, or flavored yogurt may credit as 1 oz.  
of  meat/meat alternate.  
•  For lunch and supper, 8 oz. or 1 cup of plain, sweetened, or flavored yogurt may credit as 2 oz. 
of  meat/meat alternate. 
•  Homemade yogurt, frozen yogurt (similar to ice cream), or other yogurt-flavored products (e.g. 
yogurt bars, yogurt-covered fruit or nuts, etc.) are not creditable.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
15
SERVING 
ADDITIONAL 
FOODS
Sponsors have the option to serve additional foods beyond the meal pattern requirements. When chosen wisely, 
additional foods, such as extra  vegetables, fruits, or whole grains, can increase the variety of nutrients in children’s 
diets. Serving additional foods can be beneficial for other reasons. First, additional foods, such  as small amounts of 
toppings,  condiments, and spreads (ex. mustard, honey,  salad dressing, butter, or oil) can improve the palatability 
of  the reimbursable meal. Second, additional foods can provide extra calories and energy to help satisfy children’s 
appetites. However, some additional foods, such as sweets that are not creditable under the meal pattern  
requirements, can be higher  in fat, sugar  and salt. Keep this in mind when menu planning and limit the frequency 
and amounts you serve foods such as chips, ice cream, and pastries.
If a site chooses to purchase additional food with SFSP funds, the food must be creditable under the meal pattern 
requirements. Condiments, such as ketchup or jam, that are served with creditable food are exempt from this 
restriction and can be purchased with Program funds. If a site wishes to serve additional foods that do not meet 
SFSP meal pattern requirements, the site must use non-Program funds to purchase foods. See SFSP 06-2012: 
Serving Additional Foods in SFSP, November 23, 2011, (http://www.fns.usda.gov/serving-additional-foods-summer-
food-service-program)
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
16
CREDITING FOODS
One of  the most important steps in ensuring all the meal pattern requirements are met 
is determining how a food credits towards each required meal component.
Food Buying Guide for
Child Nutrition Programs
The Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition 
Programs (FBG) is the principal tool SFSP sponsors 
should use to determine the specific contribution 
each food makes toward the  meal pattern 
requirements. The FBG contains a wealth of 
information to assist with purchasing foods that 
meet the SFSP requirements, crediting foods, and 
planning menus.
FNS would like to emphasize that while the FBG 
presents crediting information for a wide variety 
of foods, it is not an exhaustive list of all creditable 
foods. The memorandum TA 01-2015  Child 
Nutrition Programs and Traditional Foods 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/child-nutrition-
programs-and-traditional-foods)  clarifies that 
traditional foods may be served in Child Nutrition 
Programs and includes examples of how 
traditional foods of the population being served 
may contribute towards a reimbursable meal. 
Sponsors should work with their State agency 
when they have questions related to the crediting 
of foods. The FBG can be reviewed and 
downloaded at: http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/food-
buying-guide-for-child-nutrition-programs.  The 
FBG also helps sponsors calculate and purchase 
the correct amount and type of food. See section  
titled “How to Use the Food Buying Guide” of this 
Guide for more  information. Also, please use the 
new Interactive FBG Web Based  Tool and-
traditional-foods) clarifies that traditional foods. It 
is available at: 
https://foodbuyingguide.fns.usda.gov/
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Child  Nutrition  Labels
To help simplify the process of identifying how 
products contribute to the meal pattern, 
program operators can  look for CN labels on 
food packages. USDA’s Child Nutrition (CN)  
Labeling Program gives food manufacturers 
the option to include a label on their product 
that clearly identifies how the product 
contributes toward the meal pattern 
requirements. It provides a warranty against 
auditing claims if the product is used according 
to the manufacturer’s directions.
CN Labels are only available for items that 
contribute towards the meat/meat alternate 
component of the meal pattern. Some 
examples include, but are not limited to, beef 
patties, cheese or meat pizzas, meat or cheese  
and bean burritos, breaded fish, and chicken
portions.
While a CN-labeled product is guaranteed to 
contain a certain quantity of food, it does not 
indicate food quality or safety. Additionally, 
sponsors  should be aware that products  that 
do not have a  CN Label may still be creditable. 
To learn more about the CN Labeling Program 
visit: 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/cnlabeling/child-
nutrition-cn-labeling-program.
17
Product Formulation  Statements
When a sponsor purchases a product without 
a  CN Label, the sponsor may request a signed 
Product Formulation Statement (PFS) on 
manufacturer’s letterhead. An appropriate 
Product Formulation Statement will provide 
specific information about the product and 
show how the  food credits toward the meal 
pattern  requirements. Please note that foods 
listed in the FBG are not required to have a CN 
Label or (PFS). Ultimately, it is the program 
operator’s responsibility to evaluate Product 
Formulation Statement and to keep records  to 
document that meals served fulfill the meal 
pattern  requirements.
For more information on how to evaluate 
Product Formulation Statements and how they 
can be used to make purchasing decisions, 
please, see FNS memorandum TA 07-2010  
(v.3) Guidance for Accepting Processed 
Product Documentation for Meal Pattern 
Requirements: 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/guidance-
accepting-processed-product-documentation-
meal-pattern-requirements-mpr.
MEAL 
MODIFICATIONS
Disabilities
All Child Nutrition Program operators, 
including SFSP and SSO sponsors  are required 
to make reasonable modifications to the meals 
and snacks they serve, or to the meal service, 
to accommodate children with disabilities. 
These modifications are made on a case-by-
case basis.
In many cases, disabilities can be 
accommodated with little extra expense or 
difficulty. Additionally, they can often be
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
managed within the SFSP meal pattern 
requirements. For  example, if a child is allergic 
to strawberries, the sponsor may serve that  
child an orange instead and still meet the 
fruit/vegetable requirement. Modified meals 
that  meet th
 e meal pattern requirements do 
not need t o be supported b y a medical 
statement in order to be reimbursable.
If a meal modification does not meet the meal 
pattern  requirements, it must be supported  by 
a  medical statement that is  signed by a 
licensed physician or licensed health care 
professional who is authorized  to write 
medical prescriptions under State law 
(licensed  health  care professional). A medical 
statement is  required to justify that the 
modified meal is  reimbursable. The medical 
statement should include a sufficient 
description  of the child's impairment to allow 
the sponsor to understand how it  restricts the 
child's diet. It should also include a description 
of  what the sponsor  must do  in order  to  
accommodate the disability. This may include 
what foods should be served or omitted and 
recommendations for  alternative foods, or  
other information as needed.
Sponsors are not required to provide the exact 
substitution or other modification that is 
requested. However, they must work with the 
child’s parent or guardian to offer a reasonable 
modification that effectively accommodates 
the child’s disability. Sponsors may consider 
expense  and efficiency when choosing the  
most appropriate approach to accommodate a 
child’s disability. Sponsors are not required to 
make modifications that would result in a 
fundamental alteration in the nature of the 
Program. Modifications that are so expensive 
that  they would make operating the program 
impossible is considered a fundamental 
alteration in the nature of the Program. 
Sponsors faced with a very expensive request 
should first talk with the child’s parents or
18
guardians to try and find a solution. When 
experiencing challenges, sponsors should reach 
out to their  State agency for  consultation.
Modified meals are reimbursed at the same rate 
as other reimbursable meals. For more 
information on providing meal accommodations 
for children with disabilities, please see SFSP 10-
2017  Modifications to Accommodate Disabilities 
in the Child and Adult Care Food Program and 
Summer Food Service Program 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/modifications-
accommodate-disabilities-cacfp-and-sfsp).
Medical or Special Dietary Needs
FNS  encourages sponsors to make modifications 
to meals or meal service that  are not  related to a 
disability; these modifications must be done 
within the meal pattern requirements. General 
health  concerns, such as a preference for a 
gluten-free diet because a parent believes it is 
better for the child, rather than  due to Celiac 
disease, are not disabilities and  do not require 
accommodation. However, it is important to 
note, with  the passage of the American with 
Disabilities Act Amendments Act  most physical 
and mental impairments are considered a  
disability. The primary goal for sponsors should 
be ensuring equal opportunity to participate and  
benefit from the SFSP.
Non-Dairy Milk Substitutes
Schools participating in SSO or in SFSP and 
following the National School Lunch Program 
meal patterns may offer non-dairy milk 
substitutes to children who cannot consume 
fluid milk due to a special dietary need. Schools 
must receive a written request from a 
recognized medical authority or  a parent or 
guardian that identifies the child’s dietary 
reason for needing a milk substitute (7 CFR 
210.10(m)(2)). In addition, in order for the meal 
to be reimbursable, non-dairy beverages served
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
in lieu of fluid milk must be nutritionally 
equivalent to milk and provide specified  levels of 
calcium, protein, vitamins A and D, magnesium, 
phosphorus, potassium, riboflavin, and  vitamin 
B-12 (7  CFR 210.10(d)(3)). Schools that decide 
not to offer milk substitutions for children  with  
special dietary needs  must communicate this  
decision to all households.
At this time, sponsors following the SFSP meal 
patterns may only serve non-dairy beverages in 
place of fluid  milk in  a reimbursable meal when  
it is supported by a medical statement signed by 
a  licensed physician or health care  professional.
Food  Allergies
A  food allergy is a reaction of the body’s immune 
system to a protein in a food called an allergen. 
Food allergies can be serious, life-threatening 
conditions and should be diagnosed by a 
licensed physician or board-certified allergist. 
Symptoms of a food allergic reaction may 
include a skin rash, hives, itchy, watery eyes, 
swelling of lips, tongue, and throat, itching in the 
mouth or throat, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
difficulty breathing, or loss of consciousness. 
More than 170 foods are known to cause an 
allergic reaction in some people, but there are 
eight foods that most commonly trigger such 
reactions: cow’s milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, 
fish, shellfish, soy, and wheat.
A  food allergy may be assessed as a disability by 
a  physician or a licensed health care 
professional. Therefore, reasonable 
modifications as prescribed by the physician or 
the licensed health care professional must  be 
made.
When a child at the site is known to have a  food 
allergy, it is extremely important that food 
service staff or any supervising adults  handling 
food avoid cross-contact. Cross-contact happens
19
when one food comes into contact with another food and their proteins mix. As a result, each food contains 
small amounts  of the other food. These amounts may be  so small that they cannot be seen. These  tiny amounts 
of food protein can cause reactions in people with food allergies. An example of cross- contact is when a knife is 
used  to spread peanut butter and  it is only wiped off before being used to spread the jelly. There could be 
enough peanut butter left on the  knife that it could cause  a reaction in a child with a peanut allergy. All 
equipment and utensils must be  cleaned with hot, soapy water before being used to prepare  allergen-free foods. 
For more information on cross-contact visit the Food Allergy Research & Education Avoiding Cross-Contact web 
page: http://www.foodallergy.org/cross-contact.
Dietary Preferences
While sponsors are not required  to make food substitutions based solely on  a parent’s, guardian’s, or child’s 
personal or taste preferences, such  as vegetarian diets, they are highly encouraged  to do so within the meal 
pattern requirements. The SFSP meal patterns allow for a  variety of food items within each required food 
component and are flexible and adaptable enough to accommodate dietary preferences, such as religious food
restrictions or vegetarian diets.
DOCUMENTING MEALS
Keeping accurate and detailed records of the meals you prepare and serve each day is part of any successful food 
service operation. Records  are a valuable written history of your summer site operations and can be used to plan 
menus in the future. They also help sponsors spot trends, track which menus work best with the children you 
serve, and decide what type of changes  should be made.
Good recordkeeping is essential because  it is the  sole basis for reporting  the number of meals you serve, and in 
State reviews, records demonstrate that the meals served at your site comply with the SFSP requirements. Full 
and accurate records must be kept of allowable program costs as well as the number of program meals served to 
support each claim for reimbursement.
For more information on record keeping 
See Menu Production Records in this Guide.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
20
PART ONE: PLANNING QUALITY MEALS
MAKING THE MOST 
OF SUMMER MEALS
•  SUMMER MENU PLANNING: 
THE BASICS
•  HOW TO BUILD A HEALTHY PLATE
•  INCORPORATING LOCAL FOODS
•  CREATING A CYCLE MENU
•  SAMPLE CYCLE MENUS
•  SUMMER MENU IDEAS
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
•  AFFORDABLE, HEALTHY  MEALS
•  SAMPLE RECIPES
•  MEAL SERVICE OPTIONS
21
SUMMER MENU 
PLANNING: THE BASICS
Menu planning for summer meals involves a  variety of considerations. Most importantly, the menu 
must meet the SFSP meal pattern requirements. Children’s preferences, recipes, local and seasonal 
products, serving location, food  costs, food  safety and  handling, equipment, and labor must also be 
considered. With a little planning,  SFSP menus can be tasty,  nutritious,  and affordable!
First, you must take into consideration logistics, 
including: location, practicality, using cycle menus, 
calculating serving sizes and costs, food delivery, 
keeping food safe, budget, inventory, labor, and 
equipment. For example, if food is going to be  
served outdoors or delivered to a playground or 
campsite, make the menu practical and appealing 
for this setting. If you have on-site cooking facilities, 
use standardized recipes, when they are available. A 
standardized recipe is a recipe that gives the same 
reliable results every time it is prepared.
See Using Standardized and Quantity Recipes in the 
Guide for more information. Finally, make sure to 
think about  preparation time and extra needs, such 
as ice and garbage bags.
Along with logistical considerations and ensuring the 
meal meets the SFSP meal pattern requirements, it 
is important to design meals that children will eat 
and enjoy. Make sure that the menus you develop 
offer a variety of  colors, textures, and flavors, and 
are culturally appropriate for the children attending 
your summer sites. Offering a combination of hot 
and cold foods can make the meals even more  
appealing. In addition, it is important to serve food 
that  is age-appropriate for the children that attend 
the site. For example, if very young children attend 
your site, make sure the food offered is in a form 
that  is easy for them to chew and swallow.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
See Choking Risks in the Reference Section for more 
information.
Sponsors should also incorporate recommendations 
from the Dietary Guidelines into their menus by 
increasing the use of whole-grains, fresh fruits and 
vegetables, and low-fat or fat-free milk and dairy 
products, and  limiting foods high in saturated  and 
trans fat, added sugars, and sodium. Refer to the 
next section  How to Build  a Healthy Plate in  this 
Guide for recipes and tips on incorporating a wide  
variety of nutritious foods into your summer menu. 
In addition, you can use the Summer Menu Checklist 
in the Reference Section to evaluate menus. 
Using an SFSP lunch as an example, here are some 
steps to follow when creating a summer menu:
1. Begin with the  main dish or entrée. Think of a 
source of protein from the meat or meat 
alternate group. Grains, vegetables, or fruits 
may also be part of the main dish. For example, 
a  chicken burrito could be served with lettuce 
and tomato. 
2. Choose two fruits and/or vegetables that go well 
together and with the main dish. For example, a 
roasted pepper and black bean salad would go  
well with the chicken burrito. 
3. Include a whole-grain that is rich in fiber. For 
example, the chicken burrito could be served in 
a  whole-wheat wrap. 
4. Serve low-fat or fat-free milk as the beverage.
22
HOW TO BUILD A 
HEALTHY PLATE
Many sponsors may want to go above and beyond when it comes to serving healthier meals to children at 
summer sites. In recognition of this, FNS developed the following best practices and tips to help sponsors  serve 
more nutritious meals that are  based on the Dietary Guidelines. Following these best practices allows sponsors 
to ensure that children are getting the optimal benefit from the meals they receive at summer sites. FNS 
applauds those sponsors who find ways to incorporate these best practices into their meal service.
Build a Healthy Plate with Fruits
According to the Dietary Guidelines, most children 
4  years and older do not consume enough fruit. You can 
help  increase children’s consumption of  fruit by offering 
a  variety of fruits on your menu. Offering a variety of 
fruits during the week can:
• 
Teach children lifelong healthy eating habits 
• 
Add color, texture, and flavor 
to children’s plates. 
• 
Increase children’s intake of vitamins and 
minerals they need to grow and play. 
• 
Help children feel full and maintain a healthy 
weight by increasing their intake of dietary fiber
Best Practices for Fruits:
Serve a variety of fruits and choose whole fruits (fresh, 
frozen, or canned in 100% juice or water) more often  
than juice. Get  creative and try fruits that are in season 
during the summer, like melons, berries, peaches, and  
cherries.
• 
Make at least one of the two required components 
of  snack a fruit or  a vegetable. Try serving apple 
slices with peanut butter, fresh or frozen mango 
with yogurt, or pears with low-fat cheese.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
What type of fruits should I  offer?
•
Fresh, frozen, canned, and dried fruits are 
all great choices. Introduce kids to the 
whole rainbow of fruit choices – each 
fruit has its own unique flavor and 
nutrients. Provide different  choices 
each day to help children get the 
nutrition  they need. 
•
Limit fruit juice. While 100% fruit juice 
can be part of a healthy diet, it does not 
contain the dietary fiber found in other 
forms of fruit.
23
How can I serve  fruits and juices with no added 
sugars?
Extra calories from added sugars make it harder for 
children to maintain a healthy weight. Because fruits 
are naturally sweet, it can be easy to get children to 
eat them without adding sweeteners like sugar, or 
honey. Here are a few tips:
•  Serve fresh fruit instead of fruit-based 
desserts, such as fruit pies, cobblers, 
and crisps. 
•  Purchase fruit canned in water or 100% fruit 
juice instead of syrup. 
•  Offer unsweetened applesauce and try 
sprinkling ground cinnamon on top. 
•  Purchase frozen fruit that does not contain 
added sugars. 
•  Serve 100% fruit juice instead of fruit-flavored 
drinks or sodas. As a reminder, milk and  100% 
juice are the only beverages that are 
creditable in  a reimbursable meal.
Build a Healthy Plate with Vegetables
According to the Dietary Guidelines, most children 2 
years and older do not eat enough vegetables or a 
variety of vegetables.  You can help by offering a 
variety of vegetables during the week.  Serving 
vegetables at meals and snacks can:
•  Help children maintain a healthy weight as 
they grow.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
• 
Provide dietary fiber to help children feel full. 
•  Create healthy eating habits children will keep 
for life. 
• 
Add color, crunch, and flavor to children’s 
plates.
Best Practices for Vegetables:
• 
Vary the vegetables served throughout the 
week. Aim to serve as many of the following 
vegetable subgroups as possible:
•   Dark green vegetables (e.g. broccoli,
spinach, and collard greens); 
 •   Red and orange vegetables (e.g.
carrots, red bell peppers, and 
tomatoes); 
 •   Beans and peas (legumes) (e.g. black
beans, garbanzo beans (chickpeas), 
lentils, split peas, pinto beans, and 
white beans); 
 •   Starchy vegetables (e.g. corn, green
peas, green  lima beans, and  potatoes); 
and 
 •   Other vegetables (e.g. cabbage, celery,
summer squash, and green beans). 
• 
Offer more filling meals by adding extra 
vegetables.  At self-prep  sites, toss peppers, 
spinach, or cherry tomatoes  into a pasta or 
add extra broccoli, snap peas, or mushrooms 
to a stir-fry. 
• 
Make at least one of the two required 
components of snack a vegetable. Try serving 
carrots or celery with peanut butter or red 
pepper strips with  hummus.
24
What type of vegetables should I offer?
•  Fresh, frozen, or canned vegetables are all 
great choices. 
•  Each vegetable contains different amounts 
of  nutrients and fiber. Serve a variety of  
vegetables so children get the vitamins, 
minerals, and fiber they need. Provide 
different choices each  day to help  children 
get the nutrition they need. 
•  Brighten children’s plates with dark green, red, 
and orange vegetables. 
•  Incorporate a variety of dry beans and peas 
into the meal. Offer bean dips, like hummus, 
or  mashed black bean burritos. (Remember: 
dry beans and peas may be considered  either 
as a  vegetable or a  meat alternate; but, they 
cannot be credited as both a vegetable and a 
meat alternate in the same meal.)
How can I serve  a variety of vegetables low in 
sodium and solid fats? 
Vegetables are naturally low in sodium (salt) and solid 
fats, so  prepare and serve them without adding too 
much salt or solid fats like butter, margarine, cream  
sauces, and full-fat cheese. Here’s how:
•  Use herbs or no-salt spice mixes instead of 
salt, butter, or stick margarine to season 
vegetable dishes. 
•  Offer fresh vegetables more often instead of 
breaded  and fried  vegetables, including fried  
white potatoes. 
•  Purchase canned vegetables and beans labeled 
“no salt added”  or “low sodium.”  If these are 
not available, reduce sodium by draining and 
rinsing canned foods before preparing. 
•  Choose fat-free refried beans, or reduced-
sugar and reduced-sodium versions of 
baked  beans. 
•  Use frozen vegetables that do not contain 
added solid fats, sugars, and sodium.
• 
Go light on the  salad dressings, sauces, 
and dips.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Build a Healthy Plate with Legumes 
(Dry Beans and Peas) 
Legumes (dry beans and peas) are unique foods. They 
are nutritious, inexpensive, and creditable as either a 
vegetable  or a meat alternate in the SFSP meal 
pattern. Legumes are great sources of protein, iron, 
zinc, folate, and fiber. Most  children 2 years old and 
older  do not consume enough vegetables, including 
legumes. You can help by offering beans and peas on 
your menu. Offering legumes as part of a meal or 
snack can:
•  Help children feel full longer and maintain a 
healthy weight as they grow. 
•  Promote proper digestion. 
•  Add shape, texture, and flavor to children’s 
meals.
Best Practices for Legumes (Dry Beans 
and Peas): 
Substitute legumes for all or a portion of meat in your 
recipes. Keep it fun by adding themes to meals, such as 
a  southwestern lunch with bean  and vegetable chili 
and cornbread.
What type of legumes should I  offer?
•  Fresh, canned, or frozen legumes are all 
great choices. 
•  Mix things up by providing different types of 
beans and peas each  week to help children  
get the nutrition they need, as well  as taste 
new foods. 
•  Remember: dry beans and  peas may be 
counted either as a vegetable or a meat 
alternate; but, they cannot credit as both 
a vegetable and a  meat alternate in the 
same meal.
25
How can I reduce  sodium and solid fats  when 
serving legumes? 
Dry or frozen beans and peas are naturally low in 
sodium (salt) and solid fats. Prepare and serve beans 
and peas without adding too much salt or solid fats  
like butter, margarine, cream sauces, and full-fat 
cheese. Here’s how:
•  Purchase canned beans labeled  “no salt 
added” or “low sodium.” If these are not 
available, rinse and drain the canned beans 
to reduce the sodium content. 
• 
Purchase dry beans. To prepare them, pour 
the bag of dry beans into a bowl of water on 
the kitchen counter. Sort the beans to  remove 
any stones. Soak the dry beans overnight 
without adding any salt, and discard the 
soaking water and cook the next day. 
• 
Choose fat-free refried beans, or reduced-
sugar and reduced-sodium versions of 
baked  beans. 
•  Use herbs, no-salt spice mixes, or other 
vegetables instead of salt, butter, or margarine 
to season bean dishes. This will add flavor to 
the bean dish without  adding solid fats, 
sodium, and calories. Garlic, celery, onion,
and carrots complement the flavors of dry 
beans and peas.
Meat and Meat Alternates: Build a 
Healthy Plate with Protein:  
Children should eat a variety of meat and meat 
alternates each week. These foods include fish, 
shellfish, dry beans  and peas, nuts, and seeds, lean 
meats, poultry, and eggs. Most children 2 years old 
and older do not consume enough fish, shellfish, and 
dry beans and peas. You  can  help  by offering different 
meat and meat alternates on your menu. Include a 
variety of meat and meat alternates at meals and 
snacks  to:
• 
Give  children the protein, B vitamins, and 
minerals (like iron, zinc, and magnesium) they 
need  to grow, play, and learn. 
•  Protect children’s hearts,  brains,  and nervous 
systems with heart-healthy oils from fish and  
seafood. 
•  Help children feel full for longer with protein
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Best Practices for Meat and 
Meat Alternates:
•  Offer a variety of different protein foods 
throughout  the week, such as lean meats, 
seafood, poultry, legumes  (beans and peas), 
and nuts. Keep your menu lively by 
introducing new proteins to old favorites. 
For example, try salmon burgers, white turkey 
chili, or soft chicken tacos. 
•  Limit serving processed meats and poultry, 
such as hot dogs, bologna, luncheon meat, 
pepperoni, and sausages, to no more than  
once per  week. 
•  Choose low-fat or reduced-fat cheeses and 
yogurts. Get children  excited  about yogurt by 
letting them build their own yogurt parfait. 
Just like a salad bar, set up toppings for 
children to add to their yogurt. Some toppings 
may include sliced or cubed fruit (apples, 
bananas, mango, kiwis, and melon)  or whole 
grain granola.
What types of meat and meat  alternates should
I  offer? 
Providing different choices each day introduces 
children to new foods and ensures children get the  
nutrition  they need.
•  Fish and seafood (fresh, frozen, or canned) are 
good choices for  mealtime. Try salmon, tuna, 
trout, and tilapia prepared in different  ways:  
baked, grilled, or in sandwiches or tacos. 
•  Poultry,  like chicken or turkey, can be served 
grilled, roasted, or in pastas, salads, or 
burritos. 
•  Look for lean cuts of beef, pork, and  lamb. Try 
round steaks and roasts (round eye, top round, 
bottom round, round  tip), top loin, top sirloin, 
and chuck shoulder and arm roasts. The 
leanest pork choices include pork loin, 
tenderloin, or center loin. 
•  Choose the leanest ground meats possible 
(including beef, pork, chicken, and turkey), 
preferably meats labeled  “90% lean” or higher. 
The higher the % of lean, the lower the 
amount of solid fats in the meat.
26
• 
Offer unsalted, chopped, or finely ground nuts  
and seeds (including almonds, mixed nuts, 
peanuts, walnuts, sunflower seeds), and 
peanut and  sunflower seed butters spread 
thinly. 
•  Prepare and serve eggs in different ways. Try 
hard-boiled egg slices, scrambled  eggs, or 
deviled eggs (prepared  with  low-fat 
mayonnaise or mustard). Make sure  the egg 
whites and yolks are cooked thoroughly to 
avoid foodborne illness. 
•  Cooked, canned, or frozen dry beans and peas 
are all great options. Vary the choices for dry 
beans and peas. 
•  Yogurt and cheese can credit as a meat 
alternate. Serve yogurt labeled fat-free or low-
fat (1%). When selecting cheese, choose low-
fat or reduced-fat versions. 
•  Serve creditable processed soy products, such 
as meatless “chicken” nuggets or soy burgers. 
To credit soy products as a meat alternate, 
they must have a Child Nutrition (CN) Label or  
a company- certified product formulation 
statement. (Only creditable products  may be 
included in a reimbursable meal. Check with 
your State agency  or sponsoring organization 
for additional guidance.) 
•  Remember: some children coming to your site 
may be allergic to fish, shellfish, soy, milk, 
wheat, eggs, nuts, and seeds. Actively 
supervise children when serving these foods.
How can I serve  a variety of meat and meat 
alternates low in sodium and  solid  fats? 
Be sure to start with lean choices for meat and meat 
alternates. Prepare recipes without adding too much
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
sodium (salt) or solid fats  like butter, margarine, cream 
sauces, gravy, and full-fat cheese.
Here’s how:
•  Use herbs or no-salt spice mixes instead of 
salt, butter, or margarine to season dishes. 
This will add flavor without adding solid fats, 
sodium, and calories  to the dishes. 
•  Trim visible fat away from meats and poultry 
before cooking. Remove the skin  from chicken 
and turkey to reduce the amount of solid fats. 
Drain off any fat that appears during cooking. 
•  Boil, grill, roast, or poach fish, meat, or poultry 
instead of frying. These cooking methods do 
not add  extra fat and calories. Keep in mind  
that  breading adds extra calories, and frying 
causes food to soak up more fat while cooking. 
•  Limit serving highly processed poultry, fish, or 
meat (like hotdogs, chicken nuggets, and fish 
sticks) to once weekly. Even “reduced-fat” 
meats and cold cuts, like sausage, bologna, 
and salami, may be high in solid fats, sodium, 
and calories. Use canned tuna or salmon 
(packed  in  water)  for sandwiches in place of 
deli or lunch  meats, which are often higher in  
sodium. 
•  Purchase canned beans, fish, and meat labeled 
“no salt added”  or “low sodium.”  If these are 
not available, reduce sodium by draining and 
rinsing canned foods before preparing. 
•  Choose fat-free refried beans or reduced-sugar 
and reduced-sodium versions  of baked beans. 
•  See Choose MyPlate for additional ideas on 
lean choices for meat and meat alternates: 
http://www.choosemyplate.gov/protein-
foods.
27
Build a Healthy Plate with 
Whole  Grains: 
Any food made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, 
barley, or cereal grain is a grain  product. Bread, pasta, 
oatmeal, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits are 
examples of grain-rich products. Whenever possible, 
whole grain-rich versions of these grain products 
should be offered. Whole grain-rich foods are grain 
products that are 100 percent whole grain or contain 
at least 50 percent whole grains and the remaining 
grains are enriched. Most children 2 years old and 
older  do not consume enough whole grains or other  
foods rich in dietary fiber. You can help by providing 
children with a variety of whole grains during the 
week.
The Dietary Guidelines recommend making at least 
half your grains whole grains. Increase the amount of 
whole grains in children’s diets by purchasing, 
preparing, and  serving foods that contain a whole 
grain as the first ingredient in the ingredient list. 
Including whole grain-rich foods in meals and as 
snacks  can:
• 
Provide B vitamins and minerals children need 
for energy to play and learn. 
• 
Promote proper digestion. 
• 
Help children feel full longer and maintain 
a healthy weight as they grow. 
• 
Add texture and flavor to children’s plates
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Best Practices for Grains:
• 
Provide at least two servings of whole-grains 
per day
•  
Make simple switches by using whole grain 
versions of grains already in meals (for 
example, whole wheat bread or brown 
rice) 
• 
Use the Nutrition Facts label to choose and serve 
cereals with the lowest amount of 
sugar per serving. 
• 
Offer fruit instead of grain-based desserts 
(for example, apple slices instead  of apple 
turnovers)
How can I tell whether a product contains 
whole grains?
• 
Take a look at the ingredient list. Choose 
products that name a whole-grain ingredient 
first on the list or second after water – that  
means there is more of it than the other 
ingredients.
28
•  Look for “whole wheat,” “brown rice,” 
“oatmeal,”  “bulgur,”  “buckwheat,”  
“whole corn,”  “whole-grain cornmeal,” 
“whole oats, “whole rye,”  or “wild rice.”  
For foods made of multiple grains, make 
sure the whole grain ingredients appear 
near the beginning of the ingredient list. 
•  Use the Nutrition Facts label to check the 
fiber content of whole grain-rich foods. 
Choose those higher in dietary fiber. Good 
sources of fiber contain 10% to 19% of the 
Daily Value; excellent sources contain 
20% or more. 
•  Remember: the color of a grain or bread 
product is not an indication that it is a 
whole-grain food. Bread can be brown 
because of molasses or other added 
ingredients. Foods labeled as “multi-
grain,” “stone ground,” “100% wheat,” 
“cracked wheat,” “seven grain,” or “bran”  
are usually not whole grain-rich products, 
and might not contain any whole grain.
How can I limit added sugars and solid 
fats when serving whole grains? 
•  Check the ingredient list of whole grain 
products for added sugars. Look for sugar, 
honey, and  ingredients ending in “-ose.” 
For example: If present, make sure they 
are not one of the first three ingredients 
on the ingredient list. For  a naturally 
sweet taste, try topping whole grain foods 
with fresh, frozen, or canned fruit slices 
(canned in 100% fruit juice or water). 
•  Be aware of solid fats in grain foods and 
toppings by reading the ingredient list. 
Avoid products with the word 
“hydrogenated”  in the ingredient list. 
These solid fats are often found in butter, 
shortening, lard, and certain oils. Instead, 
choose those made from vegetable oils 
that  are not  hydrogenated. 
•  Choose toppings wisely for toast, hot 
cereals, pasta, noodles, and rice. Instead 
of  adding butter, stick margarine, lard, 
bacon, cream sauces, and full-fat cheese, 
use vegetable oils like olive oil or canola 
oil, low-fat cheeses, marinara sauce or 
steamed vegetables as toppings.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Build a Healthy Plate with Dairy 
Children who consume dairy products such as milk, 
milk substitutes, yogurt, and cheese get many 
important nutrients and have healthier diets than 
those who don’t. However, according to the Dietary 
Guidelines, many children ages 2 to 3 years old, and 
most children 4 years old and older, do not consume 
enough milk and dairy products. You can help by 
offering fat-free and low-fat milk and dairy products 
during the day to:
•  Provide children with nutrients such as 
protein, calcium, vitamin  D, and potassium. 
•  Help build strong bones, teeth, and muscles 
in growing children. 
•  Increase the chance that children will drink 
milk when they are older.
Best Practices for Dairy:
•  Move towards serving low-fat (1%) or fat-
free milk. 
•  Keep milk extra cold (35°F for the  best 
taste). Cold milk can make a refreshing 
beverage in  summer months. 
•  Choose low-fat or reduced-fat cheeses and 
yogurts. Get children excited about yogurt 
by letting them build their own  yogurt 
parfait. Just like a salad bar, set up  toppings 
for children to  add to  their yogurt. Some low 
in added fats and sugars toppings may 
include sliced or cubed fruit (apples, 
bananas, mango, kiwis, and melon)  or whole 
grain granola.
What type of milk  should I offer children over 2 
years old? 
Fat-free and low-fat (1%) milk options have the same 
amount of calcium and other important nutrients as 
whole and reduced-fat (2%) milks, but much less fat. 
Starting at age 2, children should drink:
•  Fat-free or low-fat (1%) milk, or 
•  Fat-free, or low-fat, lactose-free or  
lactose- reduced milk.
29
How can I serve  fat-free and low-fat milk?
•
Offer fat-free or low-fat (1%) milk most often.
 These have less saturated fat and fewer
 calories than whole or reduced-fat (2%) milk
 •
Offer lactose-reduced or lactose-free milk to
 children who are lactose-intolerant.
Making Water Available 
 When children are thirsty between meals and snacks, 
 water is the best beverage choice. The amount of 
 water needed will vary among  children and increase 
 on hot summer  days and during physical activity. You 
 can help by making safe drinking water freely 
 accessible to children throughout the day. Drinking 
 water can:
•
Keep children hydrated and healthy.
 •
Help build and maintain strong teeth, if water
 includes fluoride.
 •
Help rinse food from teeth and reduce  acid in
 the mouth, both of which contribute to dental
 cavities.
 •
Help children develop a habit of drinking water
 that  they will keep for life.
Best Practice for Water:
•
Make water available as an additional
 beverage. Try adding sliced  fruit (ex. lemons,
 limes, or berries) or cucumbers to water for a
 tasty twist.
 •
Water stations can be placed in different
 locations outside of the formal  eating area to
 help support and  encourage proper hydration.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Additional Best Practices:
•
Incorporate seasonal and locally produced
 foods into  meals to  improve freshness and
 quality. Find  out how by checking out the Farm
 to Summer resources at
 https://www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool/farm-
 summer. Also, see the Incorporating Local
 Foods section of this guide.
 •
Prepare and serve hot meals when the
 appropriate foodservice equipment is
 available. Have a popular cold sandwich as a
 backup option  in  case the hot items run  out.
 •
Offer children who participate  in the  summer
 meal programs the opportunity to sample
 menu items and give their feedback. Taste test
 activities introduce children to new foods in a
 fun and positive way.
 •  Consider offering meals for parents and
guardians so that they feel  welcome as well.
 Program policy permits meals to be sold to
 parents and  caregivers (also known as “Non-
 Program Adults") at cost. Parents and
 caregivers can sit with their children and enjoy
 lunch, which can enhance the appeal of sites
 as a  family gathering spot.
Limiting Sodium, Solid Fats, and 
 Added Sugars: 
 When planning your summer menu, it is important to 
 consider the amount of sodium (salt), solid fats, and 
 added sugars that may be in the foods you serve.
30
Sodium  
Nearly everyone benefits from eating foods with less 
sodium. On average, blood pressure goes up with 
sodium intake. Most sodium comes  from processed 
and ready- to-eat foods, which usually come  in cans, 
jars, packages, and boxes. Offering children 
minimally processed foods, such as chicken breast 
instead of chicken nuggets or fresh  vegetables 
instead of canned vegetables, is an important way to 
help children reduce their sodium intake and  stay 
healthy. Choose fresh  foods when  possible.
•  When purchasing packaged  and canned  
foods, check the Nutrition Facts labels to 
compare and choose those with less sodium. 
Foods that are low in sodium have less than 
140  mg or 5% Daily Value (DV). Serving foods 
lower in sodium can help children learn to 
like and enjoy foods with  a less salty taste. 
For more information on enjoying a variety 
of foods with less sodium, see: 
https://www.choosemyplate.gov/preschool
ers-other-dietary-components.  For recipes 
and to boost flavor with less sodium see: 
https://healthymeals.nal.usda.gov/whatssha
king.
Solid Fats 
According to the Dietary Guidelines, Americans 
consume too many foods that are high  in  solid fats. 
Solid fats, which are solid at room temperature, are 
high in saturated  or trans fats and can  increase 
blood  cholesterol levels. Solid  fats are found in 
butter (milk fat), beef fat, chicken  fat, pork fat (lard, 
bacon), stick margarine, and  shortening. The fat in  
milk is also considered solid. You can help by offering 
children fewer foods that are high in solid fats or 
replacing solid fats with healthy oils (canola, corn, 
cottonseed, olive, safflower, sunflower, etc.), which 
come from many different plants (nuts, olives, 
avocadoes) or fish and are liquid at room 
temperature. Compared to solid fats, oils are a 
healthier option. Oils are a good  source of healthy 
unsaturated  fats and  are generally cholesterol-free. 
For more information on oils and solid fats, see: 
https://www.choosemyplate.gov/oils.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Added sugars 
Sugars are found naturally in fruits and dairy 
products. However, the majority of sugars in typical 
American diets are “added sugars.” Added sugars 
are often called “empty calories” because they add 
calories to the diet without offering nutrients. The 
extra calories from added sugars make  it harder for 
children to maintain a healthy weight, and may 
contribute to weight gain; sugar also increases the 
risk for  dental cavities. Sodas, fruit drinks, cakes, 
pies, cookies, dairy desserts, and  candy are the 
major sources of added sugars for children and 
adolescents 2 to 18 years old. Check ingredient lists 
for added sugars, including: high fructose corn syrup, 
white sugar, brown sugar, honey, molasses, corn 
syrup solids, raw sugar, fruit juice concentrates, malt 
syrup, maple syrup, pancake syrup, or other 
ingredients ending in “-ose,” such as maltose or 
fructose. Choose foods that  do not list added sugars 
among the first three ingredients in the ingredient 
list. For more information on added sugars, see: 
https://www.choosemyplate.gov/added-sugars.
See FNS Resources in the Resource
Section to find more useful 
resources to help you implement
the best  practices for promoting
nutrition  in  summer meals.
31
INCORPORATING 
LOCAL FOODS
Sponsors can further improve the quality and appeal of their meals with local products. Summer is a great 
time to incorporate the bountiful harvest of fresh fruits, vegetables, and other local foods. Local foods span 
the entire meal, from fruits and vegetables to dairy, grains, meat, eggs, and beans. There are numerous 
benefits to “bringing the farm” to summer meal sites:
• 
Sponsors can increase participation by improving the quality of meals and keeping kids engaged through  
hands-on activities, such as maintaining a school or community garden. 
• 
Schools participating in the SFSP or SSO can develop continuous, year-round farm to  school 
programming, and use the summer months to test out cooking techniques and recipes using local foods. 
• 
Regional producers connect with a reliable outlet for their products during the summer months. 
• 
Kids and teens get fresh, healthy  meals and participate in activities at meals sites, staying nourished and 
engaged while  school is out.
To learn more about how to bring the farm to your summer program refer to memorandum SFSP 07-2016, Local 
Foods and Related Activities in Summer Programs, with Questions and Answers 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/cn/SP07_SFSP07-2016os.pdf), and  USDA’s Farm to Summer 
website (http://www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool/farm-summer). Additionally, check out the Procurement and  
Purchasing section of this Guide for information on how to incorporate local foods into your menus.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
32
CREATING A 
CYCLE MENU
Planning menus in advance can help to ensure a successful food service operation. One way to do this is to 
develop  a cycle menu. A cycle menu  is a set of planned menus that are repeated in the same order for a period of 
time, usually two to four weeks. The menu is different every day during the cycle. A cycle menu offers variety and 
is flexible to allow for substitutions. It is the master plan of meal  planning.
Cycle menus can  be adjusted as follows:
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
33
SAMPLE CYCLE LUNCH MENUS
Sample Cycle Lunch Menu 1
The following is a sample 4-week lunch cycle menu from the Institute of Child Nutrition. You may change any of  
the meals shown, rearrange the order, or make substitutions within a meal. Be sure each new menu offers all the 
required food components in the SFSP meal pattern. Note the variety of foods, hot and cold food items, and 
culturally diverse menu suggestions. These sample menus are primarily for on-site preparation. Variations  of the 
suggestions  can be used for off-site service at playgrounds or campsites.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
34
Sample Cycle Lunch Menu 2
This cycle menu was developed by the Milton Town School District’s Food Service Director. The Director taps into 
summer’s bounty in northern Vermont, and serves  locally sourced items  whenever possible. These meals  can be 
served at a variety of sites, including libraries and Park and Recreation Departments. Take some inspiration from the 
menu to add local foods to your menus!
MONDAY 
TUESDAY 
WEDNESDAY 
THURSDAY 
FRIDAY
WEEK 1 
Turkey and cheese 
Ham and cheese on 
Garden fresh chef salad 
Santa Fe chicken wrap 
SFSP Carnival (spike 
sandwich 
whole-wheat bun 
with turkey and Swiss 
event) with  barbecue, 
Bean and veggie salad 
games, and more 
Carrot sticks and dip 
Veggie sticks and dip 
Fruit selection 
Whole wheat roll 
Fresh fruit salad 
Local apples 
Fruit selection
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk
WEEK 2 
Turkey and cheese 
Local grilled chicken 
Ham and cheese on 
Chicken tenders 
Cheese and pepperoni 
sandwich 
whole-wheat bun 
Rice pilaf 
pizza 
Chef’s salad on local 
Carrot sticks and dip 
greens and veggies 
Local veggie sticks 
Glazed carrots 
Local garden salad
Local apples 
Fruit selection 
Fruit selection 
Fruit selection 
Watermelon 
Whole wheat roll 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk
WEEK 3 
Turkey and cheese 
sandwich
Soft serve taco with 
local  beef and cheese
Carrot sticks and dip 
Beans and rice 
Local veggie sticks 
Bread sticks
Local apples 
Fruit selection 
Fruit selection 
Fresh strawberries
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk
WEEK 4 
Turkey and cheese 
Cheeseburger on bun 
Garden fresh chef salad 
Local chicken and local 
Cheese and pepperoni 
sandwich 
with turkey and Swiss 
Caesar salad wrap 
pizza 
Potato puffs 
Carrot sticks and dip 
Fruit selection 
Fresh fruit cup 
Local garden salad 
Italian beans 
Whole wheat roll 
Local apples 
Chocolate chip cookie 
Watermelon 
Fruit selection 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk
WEEK 5 
Turkey and cheese 
Popcorn chicken 
Ham and cheese on 
Beef nachos with salsa 
Cheese and pepperoni 
sandwich 
whole-wheat bun 
pizza 
Seasoned sweet 
Spanish rice 
Carrot sticks and dip 
potato cubes 
Local veggie sticks 
Local garden salad 
Fruit selection 
Local apples 
Fresh steamed broccoli 
Fruit selection 
Watermelon 
Low-fat or 
Low-fat or 
Fruit selection 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
fat-free milk 
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Ham and cheese on 
whole-wheat bun
Local chicken salad on 
local  harvest greens
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk
Low-fat or 
fat-free milk
35
Holiday (site closed)
SUMMER MENU IDEAS
Make a plan to incorporate a variety of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains into your menu!
FOOD ITEMS 
MENU IDEAS
FRUITS 
Apples
Grapes
Honeydew
Apricots
Kiwi fruit
Bananas
Mangoes
Blackberries
Nectarines
Blueberries
Oranges
Cantaloupe
Papaya
Cherries
Peaches
Grapefruit
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Pears
• 
Apples and  peanut butter
Pineapple
• 
Fresh fruit and oatmeal breakfast
Plums
• 
Fruit and yogurt parfait
Raisins
• 
Fruit salad (fresh, frozen, & canned)
Raspberries
• 
Green, leafy salad with fruit (canned 
pineapple or sliced strawberries; serve with  
balsamic vinaigrette dressing)
Strawberries
Tangerines
• 
Smoothie (with low-fat or fat-free milk 
and/or yogurt)
Watermelon
36
FOOD ITEMS 
MENU IDEAS
VEGETABLES, 
DRY BEANS, 
AND PEAS
Dark Green:
Red/Orange:
Ants on a log  (celery sticks topped  
with raisins and peanut butter) 
Bean dip or hummus with vegetable 
sticks 
Chana Masala (spiced chickpea dish) 
• Collard 
• Mustard 
• Turnip 
• Kale 
• Spinach 
• Watercress
Bok choy
Carrots
Broccoli
Pumpkin
Greens:
Red Peppers
Tomatoes
Squash:
Acorn
• 
• 
Grilled veggie sandwich/panini 
Loaded veggie pizza with whole grain-
rich crust 
Black-eyed peas 
Sweet potatoes 
Cucumbers 
• 
Mexican rice and beans
Butternut
Dry beans and peas:
Hubbard
Black beans
Chickpeas
Starchy:
Kidney beans
Cassava
Lentils
Corn
Navy beans
Green peas
Pinto beans
Green lima beans
Soy beans
Split peas 
Plantains 
Onions 
• 
Summer veggie skewers
Sweet potato and chili boats 
Three bean salad 
Vegetable stir-fry 
Water chestnuts 
Wax Beans 
• 
Veggie burrito or quesadilla
White beans 
Potatoes
Taro
Amaranth
Whole corn:
WHOLE 
GRAINS
Brown Rice
Tortillas
Buckwheat 
• 
Kangaroo pocket (whole grain pita
Whole grain:
Bulgur
Barley
Millet
Bread/buns
Oatmeal
Cornmeal
Tabbouleh salad (bulgur, tomatoes, 
mint, parsley, lemons, and olive oil) 
Whole-grain barley stew 
Wild rice casserole 
Pitas, Rolls
Whole-grain  cereal
Crackers
Rolled oats
Noodles
Quinoa
Tortillas
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Other:
Artichoke
Asparagus
Avocado
Bean sprouts
• 
• 
•
Beets
Brussels sprouts
Cabbage
Cauliflower
Celery
• 
•
Eggplant
Green beans
Green peppers
Iceberg lettuce
• 
•
Mushrooms
Okra
• 
• 
•
Parsnips
Turnips
Zucchini 
• 
Veggie roll-up (veggies in  a whole 
grain-rich tortilla with hummus/ 
dressing) 
• 
Veggie sticks with low-fat dip
Whole rye
Wild rice
• 
•
• 
•
37
Cold pasta salad 
Egg casserole with veggies and cheese 
Greek salad (cucumber, tomato, 
olives, feta, and low-fat Greek 
dressing)
Mixed greens salad 
Whole-wheat pasta or lasagna with 
summer squash 
Salsa with whole grain-rich tortilla
chips 
Soup, stew, or chili 
Stuffed peppers with seasoned quinoa 
or brown rice filling
Breakfast dishes: Oatmeal with fruit or 
whole-grain  cereal and yogurt parfait 
Brown rice salad
pocket with  veggies and  fillings) 
Sandwich (whole grain bread) 
Stuffed peppers with seasoned quinoa 
or brown rice filling
AFFORDABLE, HEALTHY MEALS
Serving healthy meals does not have to be expensive! Below are three days’ worth of affordable 
meals* (breakfast, snack, and lunch or supper) that are filled with whole grains, fruits and vegetables.
DAY ONE
Breakfast Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Whole Grain French Toast Sticks 
4 sticks 
$0.34 
Banana 
½  cup 
$0.22 
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8 oz. 
$0.18
Snack Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Low Fat Cheese Stick 
1 oz. 
$0.24
Apple slices with cinnamon 
¾  cup 
$0.63
Lunch/Supper Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Chicken wrap:
Whole grain tortilla 
1 tortilla 
$0.21
Chicken 
2 oz. 
$0.46
Spinach 
¼ cup 
$0.07
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8 oz. 
$0.18
Carrot sticks: 
½  cup 
$0.22
DAY TWO
Breakfast Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Whole Wheat Bagel 
1 slice 
$0.39
Fruit Kabob:
Grapes 
¼ cup 
$0.24
Strawberries 
¼ cup 
$0.27
Sliced Banana 
¼ cup 
$0.11
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8 oz. 
$0.18
*Actual prices may vary depending on location
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Total: 
$0.74  (per serving)
Total: 
$0.87 (per serving)
Total: 
$1.14  (per serving)
Total: 
$1.19 (per serving)
38
Snack Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Low-fat yogurt dip 
4 oz. 
$0.52 
Carrot and Celery Sticks 
¾  cup 
$0.36
Lunch/Supper Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Turkey Pita:
Sliced turkey 
2  oz. 
$0.48
Whole Wheat Pita 
1  pita 
$0.18
Cucumber 
¼  cup 
$0.12
Hummus 
2  Tbsp. 
$0.25
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8  oz. 
$0.18
Sliced Pear with Cinnamon 
½  cup 
$0.42
DAY THREE
Breakfast Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Whole Grain Cereal 
¾ cup 
$0.20
Banana 
½ cup 
$0.22
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8  oz. 
$0.18
Snack Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Whole Grain Graham Crackers 
3  crackers 
$0.33
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8  oz. 
$0.18
Lunch/Supper Item 
Serving Size 
Cost
Grilled Cheese with Tomato & 
Avocado:
Tomato 
¼  cup 
$0.38
Avocado 
¼  cup  
$0.21
Low-fat cheese 
2  oz. 
$0.38
Whole Grain Toast 
2  slices 
$0.40
Grapes 
¼  cup 
$0.16
Low-Fat (1%) Milk 
8  oz. 
$0.18
*Actual prices may vary depending on location
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Total: 
$0.88  (per serving)
Total: 
$1.63  (per serving)
Total: 
$0.60  (per serving)
Total: 
$0.51  (per serving)
Total: 
$1.71  (per serving)
39
SAMPLE RECIPES
The following recipes are from the USDA Recipes for Healthy Kids Cookbook for Homes, which contains the top 
30  recipes from the Recipes for Healthy Kids competition. These recipes were created by teams of students, 
school nutrition professionals, chefs, parents  and guardians, and community members. Each of the recipes  
features foods children and adults should consume more often: dark green and orange vegetables, dry beans 
and peas, and whole grains. All of these healthy recipes are low in total fat, saturated fat, sugar, and sodium. 
To access the full cookbook, go to: https://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/recipes-healthy-kids-cookbook-homes.
Oodles of Noodles 
This whole-wheat pasta dish is bright and fun!
Preparation time: 15 minutes  
Cooking time: 20 minutes 
Makes: six 1-cup servings
Ingredients:
2   ¾ cups Penne pasta, whole-wheat, dry (11 oz.)
1   ½ Tbsp Extra virgin olive oil
2   ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cups Fresh grape tomatoes, halved
1   ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ tsp Dried basil
¾  ¾ 
 ¾ tsp Sea salt
¼  ¼ 
 ¼ tsp Ground black pepper
1  Tbsp Fresh garlic, minced (or 1 tsp garlic powder)
3  Tbsp Whole-wheat flour
2   ⅓  ⅓ 
 ⅓ cups Low-sodium vegetable broth
4  cups Fresh Swiss chard, stems removed, chopped
(or spinach)
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Directions:
1.  In a large pot, bring 2 quarts water to a boil. 
Gradually stir in pasta and return to a boil. 
Cook uncovered for 8-10 minutes or until 
tender. Do not overcook. Drain  well.
2.  Heat olive oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add half of tomatoes and cook 2-3  
minutes until skin soften. Do not overcook. 
Reserve remaining tomatoes for step 4. Add 
basil, salt, pepper, and garlic. Stir.
3.  Sprinkle flour over tomatoes. Cook for 30 
seconds over medium heat until mixture 
becomes thick.  Add vegetable broth. Bring to 
boil and then immediately reduce to low heat.
Add Swiss chard and remaining tomatoes. 
Simmer uncovered over low heat for 1-2 
minutes or until Swiss chard is wilted. Pour 
over pasta. Serve hot.
40
Crunchy Hawaiian Chicken Wrap 
This appealing wrap combines seasoned chicken, sweet pineapples, and crunchy shredded vegetables, 
topped with a delicious poppy seed dressing all wrapped in a warm, whole-wheat tortilla.
Preparation time: 20 minutes 
Makes: 6  wraps
Ingredients:
¾  cup Light mayonnaise
⅛  cup White vinegar
¼ cup Sugar
1  tsp Poppy seeds
1   ½  tsp Garlic powder
1 ½  tsp Onion powder
1 ½  tsp Chili powder
2  cups Fresh broccoli, chopped
1   ½  cups Fresh carrots, peeled, shredded
¼ cup Canned crushed pineapple, in  100% juice,  
drained
1  cup Fresh baby spinach, chopped
3  cups Cooked diced chicken,  ½ ”  pieces (12 oz.)
6  Whole-wheat tortillas, 10”
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Directions:
1.  In a small mixing bowl, combine mayonnaise, 
vinegar, sugar, poppy seeds, garlic powder, 
onion powder, and chili powder  for the 
dressing. Mix well. Cover and  refrigerate.
2.  Combine broccoli, carrots, pineapple, and 
spinach in a large bowl. Stir in dressing and 
chicken. Mix well. Serve immediately or cover 
and refrigerate.
3.  For each wrap, place  ⅔  cup filling on the 
bottom half of the tortilla and  roll in the form 
of  a burrito. Place seam down. Cut diagonally. 
Serve immediately.
41
Eagle Pizza 
A  delicious combination of pizza and taco, this recipe is made with whole-grain 
tostada shells, refried beans, shredded cheese, and a stack of  colorful veggies.
Preparation time: 20 minutes 
Cooking time: 10 minutes 
Makes: 6  Tostada Pizzas
Ingredients:
½  ½ 
 ½ cup Fresh spinach, julienne cut 
“shoestring strips”
½  ½ 
 ½ cup Fresh romaine lettuce, julienne cut 
“shoestring strips”
2   ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ 
tsp Salt-free chili-lime seasoning
1   ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cups Canned low-sodium refried beans, fat-free
¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cup Fresh green bell pepper, seeded, diced
¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cup Fresh onions, peeled, diced
Directions:
1. Preheat oven to 350°F.
2. Combine spinach and lettuce in bowl 
and set aside.
3. In a medium mixing bowl, combine salt- free 
seasoning blend and refried beans. Set aside.
4. In a small skillet, coated with nonstick cooking 
spray, cook green  peppers, onions, and corn 
for 3-4  minutes. Set aside.
5. For each pizza, place  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup of bean filling on 
tostada shell. Spread mixture evenly using the 
back of a spoon. Top with  ⅓  ⅓ 
 ⅓ cup sautéed 
vegetable mixture.  Lightly sprinkle 1 Tbsp of 
cheese on top.
1  tsp dried onion 
1  tsp chili powder
SALT-FREE
TACO 
SEASONING
½  ½ 
 ½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp crushed red pepper
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1   ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cups Canned  low-sodium corn, drained, rinsed
6 Whole-grain tostada shells
6  Tbsp Reduced-fat Mexican cheese blend, 
shredded (1 oz.)
1  cup Fresh carrots, peeled, shredded
½  ½ 
 ½ cup Low-sodium salsa, mild
½  ½ 
 ½ cup Fat-free sour cream
6. Place tostadas on a large baking sheet 
coated with nonstick cooking spray. Bake 
until cheese is melted, about 2 minutes.
7. Remove tostadas from oven. 
Top each tostada with: 
About 1 Tbsp spinach/lettuce mixture 
About 2  ½  ½ 
 ½ Tbsp carrots 
About 1 Tbsp salsa 
About 1 Tbsp sour cream
Serve immediately.
*If desired,  use 2  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ tsp Salt-Free Taco Seasoning 
Blend in place of salt-free chili-lime seasoning.
½  ½ 
 ½ tsp garlic powder
¼  ¼ 
 ¼ tsp oregano
½  ½ 
 ½ tsp cornstarch
42
Combine all ingredients. 
If using immediately do 
not add  cornstarch. Store 
in airtight container.
MEAL SERVICE OPTIONS
Pre-plating meals is just one meal service option sponsors may choose. Offer versus serve (OVS) and family 
style meals  are also allowable meal service options in the SFSP. OVS gives  children a greater variety of 
choices and allows children to select foods they prefer instead of foods they do not intend to eat, which 
reduces  plate  waste. Family style  meal service allows site  staff and children to eat together, creating a 
relaxing eating environment, and promoting healthy eating habits  and attitudes toward food.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
43
Offer Versus Serve
Offer Versus Serve (OVS) is a menu planning and meal service option which allows children to decline some of 
the food offered in a reimbursable breakfast, lunch, or  supper, excluding snacks. Children who  are offered food 
choices are more likely to eat the foods they enjoy rather than throw the food away. The goal of OVS is to 
reduce food waste and costs while maintaining the nutritional integrity of the SFSP meal that is served. All SFSP 
sites, regardless  of location or type of sponsorship, may utilize OVS. All sponsors  following the SFSP meal 
patterns and  using OVS are required  to follow the SFSP OVS requirements, which  are outlined  in  this Guide. 
Please remember,  OVS is not required. It is a meal planning and service option the sponsor may choose to 
implement at breakfast, lunch, or supper meals. Regardless of the type of meal service used, for any meal to 
be eligible for reimbursement, all food  components in the required minimum serving sizes must be offered. 
Before using OVS, there are several terms sponsors should know.
A  food component is one of the food groups that comprise a reimbursable meal. Sites must always offer all 
the food components that  comprise a reimbursable meal in at least the minimum required amounts. The 
food components in the SFSP are: milk, fruits and vegetables, grains, and meat/meat alternate. A food item 
is a specific food offered within the components comprising the reimbursable meal. For example, separate 
 ½  cup servings of peaches and pears are two food items that comprise one component, the fruit and 
vegetable component.
It is important to note that the OVS requirements in SFSP are different from the OVS requirements in the NSLP, 
SBP and CACFP. In order  to ensure that children receive enough food to  meet their  nutritional needs, the SFSP 
OVS requirements are as follows:
Breakfast
• 
At least the following four food items must be offered:
•  
One serving of fruit/vegetable; 
 •  
One serving of  grains; 
 •  
One serving of fluid milk; and 
 •  
One additional serving of fruit/vegetable, bread/bread alternate, or a serving of a meat/meat 
alternate 
• 
All the food items must be different from each other. For example, while a flake cereal, such as bran 
flakes with raisins, and a puff cereal, such as puffed rice cereal, are two types of cereals that are not 
identical, they are the same food item. They are both cereals. 
• 
A  child must take at least three different food items from the food items offered in order for a meal 
to be reimbursable.
Lunch or Supper
• 
At least the following five food items from the four food components required at lunch 
and supper meals must be offered:
•  
One serving of meat/meat alternate; 
 •  
Two different servings of fruit and/or vegetable (two different food  items); 
 •  
One serving of bread/bread alternate; and 
 •  
One serving of fluid milk.
Similar to breakfast, all the food items offered at  lunch and supper must  be different from each other. However, 
unlike OVS at breakfast, at lunch  and supper OVS meals, a child  must take at least three food  components, rather 
than three items in order for a meal to be reimbursable.  At least three food components are required for an 
adequate, nutritious meal for children.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
44
Offering two servings of the same food item is not permissible under OVS in SFSP. As mentioned above, all food 
items offered must be different from each other. Additionally, a larger food item that is worth two servings in 
weight, such as a two ounce muffin, counts as only one food item under OVS in SFSP, not two. Offering different 
food items increases the likelihood that children will select foods they prefer and reduces waste. School sponsors 
choosing to use the NSLP or SBP meal patterns and SFAs operating SSO that choose to use OVS are required to 
follow the OVS requirements of NSLP or SBP, respectively.
Example OVS Menu
There are a variety of ways to plan a menu that meets 
the OVS requirement. Here are two examples:
Breakfast Menu
• 
Toast 
• 
Cereal 
• 
Banana 
• 
Milk
Under OVS, a  child can select the toast, banana, 
and milk, OR the cereal, banana, and milk, OR the 
toast, cereal, and banana, OR the toast, cereal, 
and milk for a  reimbursable  breakfast.
Lunch or Supper Menu
• 
Beans (counts towards the meat/meat 
alternate component) 
• 
Roasted Chicken 
• 
Rice 
• 
Broccoli* 
• 
Apple Slices* 
• 
Milk
A  child may select the chicken, rice, and broccoli, OR 
beans, apple slices, and milk, OR chicken, broccoli, 
and milk, OR beans, rice, and broccoli, and many
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
other combinations for a reimbursable meal. If  a 
child selects beans, chicken, and rice the meal 
would not be a reimbursable meal because only two 
food components (beans and chicken which are 
both  from the meat/ meat alternate component 
and rice which is from the bread/bread alternate 
component) were taken instead of the required 
three.
*A child only needs to take one  fruit or vegetable 
item (the broccoli OR the apple slices) to count 
towards the entire fruit  and vegetable component 
in OVS.
For more detailed information on OVS, including 
questions and answers, refer to memorandum SFSP 
06 -2017,  Meal Service Requirements in the Summer 
Meal Programs, with Questions and Answers,  
https://www.fns.usda.gov/meal-service-
requirements-summer-meal-programs-questions-
and-answers-%E2%80%93-revised .  You can also 
check out the Summer Toolkit page “How to Do 
Offer Versus Serve” 
(http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/sfsp/S 
MT-OfferVersusServe.pdf) and the SFSP OVS 
Webcast(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vs_JE 
jO0_Us)  for more tips and  examples.
45
Family Style Meal Service
Family style is a type of meal service where children 
serve themselves  from common platters of food with 
assistance from supervising adults setting the 
example. Family style meal service  allows children to 
identify and be introduced to new foods, new tastes, 
and new menus, while developing a positive attitude 
toward nutritious foods, sharing in group eating 
situations, and developing good eating habits. Even 
when a complete family style meal service is not 
possible or practical, it may be useful to offer a 
component or components in a family style manner, 
particularly when smaller children  are being served or 
when a new food item is being introduced.
Family style meal service is only allowed at closed 
enrolled SFSP sites, SSO sites, and camps. These sites 
provide the stable environment required  for a 
successful family style meal service to provide 
nutritious meals to children and promote healthy 
eating habits through the personal example provided 
by supervising adults. Family style meal service cannot 
be used at any other type of summer site. 
Family style meal service gives sponsors flexibility in 
the size of the initial servings of each meal component 
because replenishment is immediately available at 
each table. In SFSP and SSO, the following practices 
must be followed when serving meals family style:
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1. A sufficient amount of food is to be placed on 
each table to provide the required portions of 
each of the food components, as outlined in 7 
CFR 225.16, for all children at the table and to 
accommodate program adult(s) supervising 
meal service if they eat with the children.
2. Children should initially be offered the full 
required portion of each meal component. The  
family style meal service allows children 
choices in selecting foods and the size of the 
initial serving.
3. When a child does not initially accept the full 
required portion of a meal component, it is the 
responsibility of the supervising adults to 
actively encourage each child to accept the 
service of the full required portion for each 
food component of  the meal pattern. For 
example, if a child initially refuses a food 
component, or initially does not take the full 
required portion of a meal component, the 
supervising adult should offer the food 
component to the child again.
46
PART ONE: PLANNING QUALITY MEALS
GETTING ORGANIZED: 
PURCHASING AND 
RECEIVING FOOD
• STAYING ON BUDGET
• PURCHASING FOOD
• PURCHASING LOCAL FOODS
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
• RECEIVING FOOD
• MENU PRODUCTION RECORDS
47
STAYING 
ON BUDGET
Like any well-run business, your  summer  program needs a budget to help you establish priorities, 
make decisions, and know how your program dollars will be generated and spent. Along with 
administrative and labor costs, you must account for operating costs. Operating costs are the 
direct expenses you  incur to “put  meals on the table,” including how much you spend on food. 
Below are some tips on how to calculate your food costs and stay on budget.
Calculating Food Costs
You can calculate food costs for each menu by 
following these steps:
• 
Select recipe 
• 
Determine the serving size 
• 
Determine how many meals to prepare 
• 
Adjust the recipes for number of servings 
• 
Calculate the amount of food needed for 
the total number of meals 
• 
Estimate the total food cost
Compare the estimated cost of  the menu with 
the amount  you allocated to your food budget. If 
the cost is higher than your food budget, try 
replacing some of the foods in the menu with less 
costly foods. For some ideas of low-cost healthy 
meals, see the Affordable, Healthy Meals section
in this Guide.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Food Inventory Records
Keep accurate and up-to-date food 
inventory records which includes the:
• 
Date the food was ordered 
• 
Name of the supplier or vendor 
• 
Date food was received 
• 
Condition on arrival 
• 
Price paid 
• 
Amount of food left
These records are helpful in planning future food 
purchases and  menus. Recording food  costs is an  
important step for documenting the non-profit 
food service and demonstrating that all costs are 
allowable. Tracking costs and inventory will help 
you stay on budget and reduce food waste.
48
A Sample Food Inventory Form is provided in the 
Reference Section of this Guide.  Use this form as a 
template for determining the value of foods used 
during a reporting period. This may be obtained  by 
taking a physical count  of foods on hand (closing 
inventory), obtaining the value of these foods from 
invoices, and calculating the total value of food on 
hand. For example, 10 cans of pears x $0.79/can  = 
$7.90.
Quantity X Unit Cost  = Total Value 
Take an inventory of any stock you have on hand at 
the beginning of Program operations as “beginning 
inventory.” Beginning inventory of a given period  
should be the same as the closing inventory of the 
preceding period.
For more information on how to hire and train food 
service staff see the SFSP Administrative Guidance 
for Sponsors. 
PURCHASING FOOD
To determine the cost of food used, take the 
beginning inventory, plus the food received, minus
How and Where to Buy Food 
How and where you buy food depends on a variety 
of  factors, including where the summer  site is 
located, if there are food preparation facilities on 
site, and how many children attend the site. It is  
important for sponsors to keep in mind that all 
procurement of food, supplies, and goods with 
Program funds must comply with procurement 
standards (7 CFR 225.17). See the SFSP 
Administrative Guide for more detailed information 
on procurement and bid procedures.
Vended Meals 
Sites without on-site food preparation facilities and 
sites  with high participation rates  may consider 
vending meals from a Food Service Management 
Company (FSMC) or food vendor. To ensure high 
quality, nutritious meals, here are some things to 
consider when having meals vended:
1. Find out which FSMC or vendors in your 
area can:
To learn more about FSMCs, see the SFSP Administrative Guide for  Sponsors.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
the closing inventory (Beginning Inventory  + Food 
Received – Closing Inventory = Cost of Food Used). The 
dollar value of food received is obtained from 
the receipts or invoices for the reporting period.
Food costs are just one piece of the budget. There 
are many other factors sponsors should consider when 
planning their budget, such as the cost of utensils and  
equipment needed to prepare and
serve the meal, kitchen utilities, rental of kitchen 
and food service equipment, and salaries of cooks, site 
personnel, and other food service staff. See the 
Summer Toolkit “Budgeting for Success” toolkit 
pages (https://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/summer-meals-
toolkit)  for more information on how to 
stay on budget.
• 
Supply foods that will  help you meet the 
Dietary Guidelines recommendations 
(i.e., whole grains; whole vegetables and  
fruits; low-fat and fat-free dairy; foods 
low in solid fats, added sugar, and 
sodium). 
• 
Supply foods you will use frequently 
• 
Provide the services you require (prompt 
and frequent delivery, credit, discounts). 
2. Buy from FSMCs or vendors who provide 
the best quality foods at the most  reasonable 
prices. 
3. Keep in mind that some SFSP sponsors may be 
eligible to receive  USDA Foods for use either 
directly from the State distributing agency or the 
local  school  food authority. Fruits, vegetables, 
legumes, whole grains, and lean protein are 
available. Visit http://www.fns.usda.gov/fdd for 
more information. 
4. Follow a strict code of business ethics when you 
purchase foods for the Program. Know what the 
FSMCs expect, and let them know what you 
expect of  them.
49
Developing Food Specifications 
When preparing food on a large scale and 
procurement is needed, a food  specification  will need 
to be developed. A food specification is a detailed or 
specific list of the desired characteristics of a food 
product. How you  plan  to use the food determines 
both  the form and  quality you  should  buy. Consider 
the product's style, size, count, container, and packing 
medium. In addition, consider requesting local foods 
in your food specification. Buying seasonally and 
locally can help keep food costs lower. You should:
•  Provide the FSMC or vendor with clear 
specifications  for each food item ordered. 
•  Include or adapt the food specification criteria 
below into your Invitation  for Bid (IFB)  or 
Request for  Proposal (RFP). 
•  Upon delivery of the order, check to see if the 
food meets the specifications and is in good 
condition.
Specification Criteria
•  Name of product or Standard of Identity 
•  Grade, type 
•  Size of container 
•  Unit size 
•  Description 
•  Delivery requirements 
•  Sanitation conditions expected 
•  Provisions fair to seller and protective  
to buyer  
•  Tolerance level accepted 
•  Estimated product usage 
•  Condition of the product
See a Sample Specification Bid in the Reference 
Section. You can also review the Food Research and 
Action Center’s A How-To Guide for Summer Food 
Sponsors on Purchasing High-Quality Summer Meals 
(http://frac.org/wp-
content/uploads/2009/09/summer_meals_vendor_gu 
ide.pdf). This guide includes concrete strategies to 
work with vendors and improve the quality of meals 
served.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Self-Prep Sites 
Sites with the capacity to prepare meals on-site may 
purchase food  at grocery stores, wholesale stores, or 
big box stores. Here are some tips to keep in mind 
when shopping to pick out the highest quality foods:
•  Read the Nutrition Facts Label and be familiar 
with the nutrients and ingredients. See 
Nutrition Facts Label at a Glance and How 
to Read Nutrition Labels in the Reference  
Section. 
•  Buy federally inspected meats and poultry. 
•  Purchase only pasteurized low-fat and fat-
free dairy products that meet State and 
local  standards. 
•  Purchase bread and bread products that are 
properly wrapped or kept in paper-lined 
containers with covers to keep them fresh 
and wholesome. 
•  Check dates on packages of bread and bread 
products to be sure that they are fresh. 
•  Purchase frozen foods that have been  kept 
frozen solid. 
•  Purchase perishable foods that have been 
properly stored  or kept under refrigeration 
if required.
50
How Much Food to Buy 
The following guidelines can help you decide how 
much food to buy:
• 
Review the cycle menu.
AMOUNT NEEDED
NUMBER OF SERVINGS PER PURCHASE UNIT
• 
Determine the recipes to use. 
• 
Calculate the quantities of food you need to 
meet the required meal pattern serving sizes. 
• 
Compile the "grocery list" of foods and 
quantities you need  to buy. 
• 
Check your existing inventory to determine 
what is on hand and subtract that from the list 
of foods to purchase. 
• 
Keep in mind the size of the storage facilities 
and buy only the quantities of food that you 
can store properly. 
• 
Buy only the products you need.
USDA's Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition Programs 
(http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/food-buying-guide-for-
child-nutrition-programs)  helps Program operators 
determine the quantities of food  to purchase to 
prepare meals for children. See the Food Buying Guide 
charts for commonly eaten fruits and vegetables in the 
Serving Sizes and Yields for Vegetables and Serving 
Sizes and Yield for Fruits 
in the Reference Section.
Use the Food Buying Guide and the following steps  
to determine how much food to buy:
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1. Determine the serving size and the total 
number of servings needed for each food item 
as follows: 
For meat, poultry, fish or  cheese, multiply the 
number of servings times the serving size (in  
ounces) to get total ounces needed. For 
vegetables and fruits, the Food Buying Guide 
lists amounts to buy based on  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup servings. 
Therefore, to calculate the amount to 
purchase, convert your serving size to the 
number of  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup servings. This is done by 
dividing the serving size by  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ and then 
multiplying the result by the number of 
servings to get the total number of  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup-
servings needed. See examples  below.
2. Divide the amount needed (total ounces of 
meat or total number of  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup servings of the 
vegetable or fruit) by the number of servings 
per purchase unit (from column  3 of the Food  
Buying Guide for the food you want to use).
Example A: Canned-Sliced Cling Peaches, fruit 
and juice
1. Serving size: 𝟏 ½ 
 ½ cup fruit and juice 
Number of servings: 50
2. Calculate the number of  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup servings: 
½  ÷ ¼ = 2 x 50 = 100  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup servings
3. Amount needed (no. of ¼ cup servings) = 100 
50.0* = 2.0  #10 cans Servings per purchase 
unit
*  Servings per purchase unit is the number of servings 
of canned cling peaches with fruit and juice per #10 
can = 50.0.
51
Example B: Carrot Sticks
1. Serving size:  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup 
Number of servings:  50
2. No conversion is needed because the serving 
size  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
3. Amount needed (no. of  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup servings) = 50 
÷ 
10.3* = 4.85 or 5  lbs.
*  Servings per purchase  unit is the number of servings 
of  fresh carrots per pound = 10.3.
Example C: Ground Beef, fresh or frozen, no 
more than 20% fat
1. Serving size: 2 ounces, cooked 
Number of servings: 50
2. Number or servings  x serving size = total 
ounces needed 
50  servings x 2  ounces = 100  ounces
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
When to Buy Food 
The following guidelines can help you decide when to 
buy each type of food:
• 
Buy bread, milk, and produce every day or 
every 2 days if storage allows.
• 
Buy perishable foods, such as meat, fish, 
poultry, and  frozen foods in  quantities that 
can be stored in the refrigerator and freezer. 
Check out the Safe Storage Times chart 
(http://www.foodsafety.gov/keep/charts/stor 
agetimes.html) to make sure you throw food  
out before harmful bacteria grow.
• 
Buy canned foods and staples monthly or 
twice a month if dry storage is available.
• 
Buy foods that are in season for the freshest 
and highest-quality foods. Seasonality of food 
varies by region.  Sponsors can search 
seasonality charts for their area. Many State 
Departments of Agriculture have a seasonality 
chart on their website.
52
PURCHASING 
LOCAL FOODS
In many regions across the United States, summer months align with the peak  growing season.  
This allows sponsors to tap into summer’s bounty and purchase local food from a variety of sources:
• 
Through distributors, vendors, or food service management companies; 
• 
Direct from a farmer or food hub; 
• 
Farmer’s markets; 
• 
Community supported agriculture (CSA) programs; and, 
• 
School or community gardens.
The USDA guide Procuring Local Foods for Child Nutrition Programs 
(http://www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool/procuring-local-foods), showcases the many ways sponsors can  find, 
buy, and  serve local foods in  Summer meals. Additionally, see the memorandum SFSP 07-2016, Local Foods and 
Related Activities in Summer  Programs, with Questions and Answers http://www.fns.usda.gov/local-foods-and-
related-activities-summer-meal-programs-questions-and-answers).
BEST PRACTICE – LOCAL  PROCUREMENT: In Kalispell, Montana, the school district’s summer 
menus are specifically tailored to include local fresh tomatoes, cucumbers, greens, and squash 
that  come from several area greenhouses and local farms. In addition, fresh greens and fruits are 
made available through a unique partnership with a local  community college’s sustainable 
agriculture program and an agreement that enables them to purchase through the school’s CSA. 
In addition to seeking new purchasing relationships for summer months, Kalispell also extends 
their existing school-year relationship with Lower Valley Beef through the summer months, so 
that  local hamburger and polish dogs can be served on summer trays. This well-rounded approach 
illustrates the many possible sources for incorporating local  food into summer meals.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
53
RECEIVING FOOD
When receiving food deliveries from suppliers or vendors, uses the following guidelines:
• 
Confirm the supplier or vendor name, the 
date and  time of delivery, and the driver’s 
identification (ID) before accepting 
delivery. If the driver’s name is different 
than what  is indicated on the delivery 
schedule, contact the supplier or vendor 
immediately. 
• 
When the delivery truck arrives, make sure 
it looks and smells clean and is equipped 
with the proper food storage equipment. 
Check the interior temperature of 
refrigerated trucks to  ensure proper  
holding temperatures were maintained. 
• 
Examine all food upon delivery to be sure 
it is not spoiled, dirty, infested with 
insects, or opened. 
• 
Do not accept foods that fail to meet your 
food specifications. 
• 
Do not accept foods that are not on the 
order  form or  are in poor condition. Make 
sure the order form indicates  the correct 
food items for the menu(s), the correct 
number of meals or food  items, and  the 
date and  time of delivery. 
• 
Make sure all perishable foods (e.g., milk, 
eggs, cheese, fresh meats, poultry, fish, 
and lunch meats) have either an expiration 
date or a “sell by” date on the packaging. 
• 
Do not accept food that  is past its 
expiration date.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
o 
If the food has a “sell by”  date, 
check it to make sure that you will 
be able to use the product in  a 
timely manner. 
o 
Check and document the 
temperature of all foods when they 
are delivered to ensure that they are 
within proper ranges. If the 
temperature of cold food is above 
41  °F or  the temperature of  hot food 
is under 135°F, the food should be 
rejected. 
• 
Make sure that frozen foods are stored in 
airtight, moisture-proof wrappings. 
• 
Do not accept frozen foods that have started 
to thaw, or have been thawed and refrozen. 
Signs of this are large ice crystals, large areas 
of  ice, water, or  excessive ice in containers. 
• 
Do not accept cans that have any of the 
following: no  labels, swollen sides or ends, 
flawed seals or seams, dents or rust. 
• 
Do not accept any foods delivered in flats 
or  crates that are dirty.
For additional information on receiving, refer to 
ICN’s HAACP-based Standard Operating Procedures:  
https://theicn.org/icn-resources-a-z/standard-
operating-procedures/.
54
MENU PRODUCTION 
RECORDS
Some States also require sponsors to maintain production records, which include detailed 
information about how food was purchased and the specific amounts of foods prepared and 
served. This  is  an additional State requirement that requires  FNS Regional office review and 
approval. Contact your State agency  to determine whether production records are required.
The SFSP regulations require sponsors to maintain records of participation and preparation of ordering meals 
to demonstrate that  the appropriate number of meals was ordered and justify all costs and meals claimed. 
These should include records of:
• Meal counts taken daily at  each site. 
• Program operating costs, including food and other costs. 
• Program administrative costs, including labor and supplies. 
• Funds accruing to the program.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
55
PART ONE: PLANNING 
QUALITY MEALS
SETTING THE STANDARD: 
FOOD SERVICE QUALITY
•  FOOD PREPARATION
•  USING STANDARDIZED AND 
QUANTITY RECIPES
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
•  SERVING UTENSILS
•  FOOD SERVICE
56
FOOD 
PREPARATION
Serving appetizing and nutritious foods depends on good planning, selection, and storage, 
but also on  good  food  preparation  using standardized  recipes whenever possible.
Food Preparation Tips
• 
Wash fresh fruits and vegetables with water (no soap) and use a brush if necessary to remove soil. 
Remove damaged leaves, bruised spots, peels, and inedible parts. Use a sharp blade when trimming, 
cutting, or shredding to avoid  further bruising and nutrient loss.
• 
Steam or cook vegetables in small batches for best quality. Cook until tender-crisp, avoid over cooking, 
and use as little water as possible to help retain vitamins and minerals.
• 
Add only a small amount of salt, if any, to water or to foods  when cooking. Do not add salt when cooking 
pasta or rice.
• 
Cook potatoes in their skins to help retain nutrients.
• 
Trim visible fat from meats and meat products.
• 
Cook cereals and cereal grains according to cooking directions. There is no need to rinse or drain cereals 
or  cereal grains, such as rice, after  cooking.
• 
Consider children's tastes and preferences when using spices.
• 
Follow standardized recipes exactly. Measure and weigh ingredients precisely and follow procedures 
carefully. This includes using the equipment, times, and temperatures specified in the recipe.
• 
Serve the portion sizes specified in the recipes and menus and make sure those portion sizes follow 
the SFSP meal pattern requirements. Use correct serving utensils to portion  foods.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
57
USING STANDARDIZED 
AND QUANTITY RECIPES
Standardized Recipe 
A standardized recipe specifically describes the amount of ingredients and the preparation method 
needed  to produce a consistently high-quality product. Standardized  recipes help  SFSP operators 
prepare menu  items with  consistent quality, portion  size, and  nutritional value every time.
Sample: 
Below is a sample standardized recipe. It specifies the number of portions and the size of each portion.
Toasted Cheese and Tomato Sandwich 
Directions:
Ingredients 
24  Servings 
48 Servings
Weight 
Measure 
Weight 
Measure
Enriched  white 
bread, sliced  (at 
least 0.9 oz each) 
OR 
Whole wheat bread, 
sliced (at least 0.9 oz 
each)
24  slices 
OR
24  slices
Reduced fat 
processed 
American cheese, 
sliced, 1 oz slices
1  lb. 8  oz. 
24  slices 
(1  oz 
each)
1  lb 5  oz 
12  slices 
(1  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ oz 
each)
Fresh tomatoes, 
1  ¾ oz 
Slices
Serving:  ½  sandwich provides 1 oz of  cheese, Yield: 24  
servings: 24 half sandwiches  ⅛  cup of vegetable, and 1  
slice of bread. Yield: 48 servings: 48  half sandwiches
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1. Lightly coat half-sheet pans  (13” 
x  18” x  1”) with pan release 
spray. Place half the bread slices 
on the pan, up to  6 slices per 
pan. For 24 servings, use 2 pans. 
For 48 servings, use 4 pans.
48  slices 
OR
2. Top each slice of bread with 1 
oz. (1 slice) of cheese, 1  ½  ½ 
 ½ oz. (1 
slice) of tomato, and another 1 
oz. (1 slice) of cheese. Cover 
with remaining bread slices.
48  slices
3  lb 
48  slices 
(1  oz 
each)
3. Bake until lightly browned: 
Conventional oven: 400° F for 
15-20  minutes. Convection 
oven: 350° F for 10-15  minutes. 
CCP: Hold for hot service at 135° 
F  or higher.
2  lb 
10  oz 
24  slices 
(1  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ oz 
each)
4. Cut each sandwich in half 
diagonally. Serve immediately.
58
Resources 
You can find more standardized recipes here:
• 
USDA Standardized  Recipes: 
http://www.fns.usda.gov/usda-standardized-
recipe 
• 
Measuring Success with Standardized Recipes 
from the Institute of Child Nutrition:  
https://professionalstandards.fns.usda.gov/conte 
nt/measuring-success-standardized-recipes.  
• 
Contact your State agency for copies of recipes for 
use in  the Program. 
• 
Other recipes from associations, the food 
industry, and reliable cookbooks may provide 
variations for you to use from time to time. 
• 
USDA's "What's Cooking" Site: 
https://whatscooking.fns.usda.gov/ 
Quantity Recipes 
To use quantity recipes properly, follow these steps:
1.  Read the entire recipe carefully before beginning 
preparation.
2.  Adjust the food quantities in the recipe to provide the 
number of servings you need.
3.  Determine the amount of food needed for preparing 
the recipe. (Refer to the  section on How to Use the 
Food Buying Guide.)
4.  Collect the necessary utensils and ingredients.
5.  Weigh and measure ingredients accurately. Weigh 
ingredients whenever possible since weighing is more 
accurate. If you must measure ingredients, use 
standard measuring equipment.
6.  Follow directions carefully for combining ingredients 
and cooking the product. Note that quantity recipes 
may take more time to prepare, for example, if you 
need  to thaw a large amount of frozen meat.
7.  Serve portion size according to  recipe. Also, make 
sure portion sizes served follow meal pattern 
requirements.
For more information, refer to: USDA Recipes  for Schools  and Child Care: 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/team-nutrition-recipes-and-cookbook-toolkit
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
ALLOWABLE MEAL COMBINATIONS
AP – as purchased 
qt - quart
EP  – editable portion 
gal - gallon
Cyl - cylinder 
oz - ounce
pkg - package 
fl oz – fluid ounce
tsp - teaspoon 
No. - number
Tbsp. - tablespoon 
wt - weight
lb - pound 
incl - including
pt - pint 
excl - excluding
EQUIVALENT MEASURES
1  tablespoon = 
3  teaspoons 
1  cup = 16  tablespoons
⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ cup = 2 tablespoons or 
1  fluid ounce
¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup = 4 tablespoons 
1  pint = 2  cups
⅓  ⅓ 
 ⅓ cup = 5  ⅓  ⅓ 
 ⅓ tablespoons 1  quart = 4 cups
⅜   ⅜ 
  ⅜ cup = 6 tablespoons 
1  gallon = 4 quarts
½  ½ 
 ½ cup = 8 tablespoons 
1  peck = 8 quarts (dry)
⅔  ⅔ 
 ⅔ cup = 
10  ⅔  ⅔ 
 ⅔ tablespoons 
1  bushel = 4  pecks
¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cup = 12  tablespoons 
1  pound = 16  ounces
59
½  ½ 
 ½ pint = 1 cup or 
8  fluid ounces
SERVING UTENSILS
Scoops, ladles, and serving spoons  of standard sizes  provide dependable measures  and help 
serve food quickly.
Scoops 
The number of the scoop indicates the number of 
scoopfuls required to make 1 quart. The following 
table shows the level measure of each scoop in cups 
or  tablespoons:
SCOOP NO. 
LEVEL  MEASURE
6  
 ⅔  ⅔ 
 ⅔ cup
8 
 ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
10 
 ⅜  ⅜ 
 ⅜ cup
12 
 ⅓  ⅓ 
 ⅓ cup
16 
 ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
20 
3   ⅓  ⅓ 
 ⅓ tablespoons
24 
2   ⅔  ⅔ 
 ⅔ tablespoons
30 
2  tablespoons
40 
1   ⅔  ⅔ 
 ⅔ tablespoons
Use scoops for portioning foods such as muffin batter, 
meat patties, and some vegetables and salads.
FOOD SERVICE
Once food is ready to serve, food service staff  must maintain  food  quality and  avoid  food  contamination.
• 
Maintain foods at proper temperatures before and during meal service (hot foods must be above 135 °F and 
cold foods must be below 41 °F). Use food thermometers to determine temperatures. 
• 
See the Take Precautions": Food Safety section of this  guide for more information. 
• 
Use proper serving utensils to consistently get the correct portion size. 
• 
Serve meal components together as a meal, and serve only one  meal per child. 
• 
Keep an accurate  count of the  number of children  and adults you serve. 
• 
Encourage a pleasant eating environment that supports meal time as a learning experience.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Ladles
Use ladles to serve soups, stews, sauces, and other 
similar products. The following sizes of ladles are most 
often used for  serving meals:
NUMBER ON  LADLE 
APPROXIMATE
1  fluid ounce 
 ⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ cup
2  ounces 
 ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
4  ounces 
 ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
6  ounces 
 ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cup
8  ounces 
1  cup
12  ounces 
1   ½  ½ 
 ½ cups
Serving Spoons 
When using a serving spoon (solid or slotted) instead of 
a  scoop, you must measure or weigh the quantity of 
food from the various sizes of spoons you use in order 
to obtain the approximate serving size you need. Since 
these spoons are not  identified by number,  you may 
want to keep a  list of the amount of food each size 
spoon holds  as  an aid for the staff serving the food.
60
MEASURE
PART ONE: PLANNING QUALITY MEALS
EDUCATION AND 
ENRICHMENT
•  INTRODUCING NEW FOODS
•  CREATING A POSITIVE  EATING 
ENVIRONMENT
•  NUTRITION  EDUCATION
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
•  LOCAL  FOOD  ACITIVITIES
•  PROMOTING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
•  SPOTLIGHT ON SUMMER FOOD 
SERVICE PROGRAMS
61
INTRODUCING 
NEW FOODS
Picky eating is common among young children,  but with some encouragement, children can learn to 
love new and healthy foods. Children are more likely to try and like new foods when you serve meals 
that look  and taste good. You can introduce new foods with fun, interesting nutrition  education  
activities. Use these tips to help get kids excited about trying  healthy, new foods and meals:
Take it slowly
• 
It can take 10  or more exposures for children 
to like a new food. 
• 
Introduce new ingredients by adding them to 
children’s favorite foods. 
• 
Add beans and peas or vegetables to pastas, 
tacos, casseroles, stews, and side dishes. 
• 
Introduce whole grains gradually, in new or 
familiar recipes 
• 
Try mixing whole-grain and non-whole-grain 
foods in your recipes and meals. Then, 
gradually increase the amount of whole grains 
each time  you make  them.
Add a variety of  colors, shapes, and 
textures to meals
• 
Use several different noodle shapes (e.g., 
macaroni, penne,) to create a cold pasta salad 
or  hot pasta dish. 
• 
Add crushed pineapple, mandarin oranges, or 
fresh apples to salad mix or coleslaw. 
• 
Prepare a stir-fry with a variety of  different 
colored vegetables. Use dark leafy greens, 
such as  spinach, as  a base. Then, add red 
peppers, shredded carrots, and red  cabbage.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Make  Food Fun
• 
Serve fresh vegetable  sticks (zucchini, yellow 
squash, celery, red pepper) with hummus  
(pureed  chickpeas, olive oil, and  lemon juice), 
or  “Alligator  Eyelash Dip” (plain, low- fat 
yogurt mixed with dill or other herbs). 
• 
Try “Shark Pockets” (stuff half a whole-wheat 
pita pocket with  canned  light tuna, spinach, 
shredded carrots, and a little salad dressing) 
or  “Mighty Monster  Meatloaf” (made with 
whole-grain bread or cracker crumbs and lean 
ground meat). 
• 
Add kidney and pinto beans in chili and serve 
it in a baked sweet potato “chili boat.” Let 
children mash beans in a plastic  bag, and then 
make a “Smashed Bean Burrito” with a whole-
grain tortilla, spinach, and their favorite 
veggies. 
• 
Create themed food dishes for special events, 
holidays, and  celebrations. 
• 
Create your own Milk  Mustache event! Take 
pictures of children drinking low-fat milk and 
post them on a bulletin  board. 
• 
Sing a song while working with ingredients 
during a cooking demonstration  or while 
mixing recipe ingredients.
62
Cook Together
•  Children learn about fruits and vegetables 
when they help prepare them. Young children 
can help rinse fruits and make “faces” out of 
pieces of fruits. Pick kitchen  tasks that match  
children’s abilities: mash bananas, peel some 
fruits, or mix ingredients for a fruit salad. 
Provide safe, child-size tools, like vegetable 
peelers and nylon knives. If they help prepare 
it, they’ll  want to taste it! 
•  Have children make a potato bar by choosing 
their own toppings for half a baked potato. 
Arrange separate bowls and serving utensils 
for refried beans, black-eyed peas, chopped 
chicken tenders, shredded low-fat cheese, 
sliced cherry tomatoes, thinly chopped 
spinach, and grated carrots  for children to 
build their own  baked  potato.
See the “Edible Art” activity from Team Nutrition’s 
Community Nutrition Action Kit at: 
http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/diginTG_l 
esson1.pdf
Introduce beans by adding them to 
children’s favorite foods
•  Add beans and peas to pastas, tacos,  
casseroles, stews, and side dishes.  
•  Make “Mexican Pizza” by topping whole-
wheat pita bread with refried  beans, tomato 
salsa, spinach, and low-fat cheese.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Use taste tests and games to help kids 
try new foods
•  Highlight unique fruits or vegetables, such as 
purple carrots from the farmer’s market, with  
a  “show and tell” each week. 
•  Have  a bean guessing game  or taste  test: let 
children sample dishes that use dry beans or 
peas as the main  ingredient, and  have 
children “name that bean!” Some ideas 
include lentil  soup, bean dip, three bean 
salad, or bean burgers. 
•  Have children taste-test whole-grain versions 
of  crackers, granola bars, soft pretzels, bagels, 
or  cereals. See if they can tell the difference!
Model eating behaviors
•  Remember, kids learn from you! See Creating 
a  Positive Eating Environment for more 
guidance on modeling  eating behaviors at 
summer sites.
Incorporate nutrition education 
into meals
•  See the Nutrition Education section of this  
Guide for information and resources on how 
to incorporate fun  nutrition education  along 
with the meals served.
63
CREATING A POSITIVE 
EATING ENVIRONMENT
Along with serving nutritious meals, a pleasant and safe eating environment is another important  
factor to building a successful summer program. Bringing children and foods together in a happy  
meal setting helps children develop healthy habits and attitudes that can last a lifetime.
Tips for Adult Role Models
•  Sit with children for meals.
•  Don’t rush. Allow enough time for children to eat and enjoy the experience within meal service time 
requirements.
•  Help children recognize hunger cues.
•  Encourage and try new foods with children and praise children when they try new foods.
•  Discuss the color, shape, size, nutritional value, or origin of the foods served to stimulate appetite and 
encourage  consumption of new foods.
•  Engage children in conversation about meals and healthy foods. For example, ask children to name  the  
food groups; to  name examples of  fruits, vegetables, dairy products, meat or meat alternates, and 
grain products; or to name their favorite healthy foods, and explain what they like about them.
•  Be mindful of the language you use to encourage healthy eating. Use phrases that help; avoid phrases 
that  hinder (see the table on the next  page).
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
64
Phrases that Help 
Phrases that Hinder
This is kiwi fruit; it’s sweet like a strawberry. 
These radishes are very crunchy! 
Phrases like these help to point  out  the sensory qualities 
of  food. They encourage children to  try 
new foods.
Do you like that? 
Which one is your favorite? 
Everybody likes  different foods, don’t they? 
Phrases like these make children feel like they are making 
the choices. It  also shifts the focus toward  the taste of 
food rather than who  was right.
Is your stomach telling you that you’re full? 
Is your stomach still making its hungry growling noise? 
Has your tummy had enough? 
Phrases like these help children to recognize when they 
are full. This can prevent overeating.
Source: Institute of Child Nutrition, Family Child Care FUNdamentals
The Physical Environment
If you are serving foods inside a building:
• 
Make sure the room or outdoor area is clean, 
safe, and attractive. 
• 
Create a fun environment by using bright colors  
and decorations that children like. 
• 
Offer good lighting and proper air circulation. 
• 
Provide age-appropriate chairs, tables, dishes, 
and utensils. 
• 
Arrange food on plates and garnish serving  
lines to make meals attractive. 
Avoid delays so children do not have to wait. 
• 
Have children help set up the food service area 
and help clean up after eating.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Eat that for  me. 
If you do not eat one more bite, I  will be mad. 
Phrases like these teach children to eat for your 
approval. This can lead children to have  unhealthy 
behaviors, attitudes, and beliefs about food  and 
about themselves.
See, that didn’t taste so bad, did it? 
This implies to children that they were wrong to 
refuse the food. This can lead to  unhealthy attitudes 
about food or self.
No dessert until you eat your vegetables. 
Stop crying and I will give you a cookie. 
Offering some foods, like dessert, in reward for 
finishing others, like vegetables, make some foods 
seem better than others. Getting a food treat when 
upset teaches children  to eat to feel better. This can  
lead to overeating.
If you are serving food outdoors:
• 
Maintain food quality and safety by providing 
ice or refrigeration for cold foods, and 
warmers for hot foods. 
• 
If you are transporting food to outdoor sites, 
look into using refrigerated trucks and/or 
warmers. Proper temperatures must be 
maintained when transporting food. For more 
information, refer to the Food Safety section.
65
NUTRITION EDUCATION
Nutrition education involves  teaching children about foods  and how they are important for good  health. 
Nutrition education is  an important part of serving meals  to children participating in SFSP. Encourage 
your staff to provide a  variety  of activities to help children learn about healthy  eating  behaviors.
Nutrition knowledge helps children:
• Develop positive attitudes toward 
nutritious meals. 
• Learn to accept a wide variety of foods. 
• Establish good food habits early in life. 
• Share and socialize in group eating 
situations.
Nutrition education is most  effective when you 
combine educational concepts with other 
learning activities. Learning is reinforced when children 
have an  opportunity to practice.
This section provides tips, resources, and creative ways 
of  incorporating nutrition education into  a variety of 
site activities.
Nutrition Education Resources 
Summer Food, Summer Moves Resource Kit: Summer 
Food, Summer Moves is a fun, hands-on resource kit 
designed  to get kids and  families excited about healthy 
eating and physical activity during the summer. The  kit 
is designed to be used by summer meal  site operators 
and focuses on using music, games, art, and movement 
to motivate kids and families to choose  more  fruits and 
vegetables, choose water instead of sugary drinks, get 
enough physical activity every day, and limit screen 
time. To learn more about the Summer Food, Summer 
Moves Resource Kit visit: 
http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/summer-food-summer-
moves
Team Nutrition: Make learning about nutrition and 
physical activity an adventure children will never forget 
by incorporating Team Nutrition  materials into your 
summer meal site. Activity sheets, lesson  plans, 
posters, and  stickers are just a few of the resources 
available. All resources are free. Materials can be 
downloaded  or ordered from 
https://pueblo.gpo.gov/TN/TNPubs.php
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Focus on MyPlate: MyPlate is a great resource that 
can be incorporated into your program. Visit 
http://www.choosemyplate.gov/ to download or 
order  the available lesson plans and use them to 
make nutrition fun for participants.
Sample Nutrition Education Activities 
Sponsor a Nutrition and Physical Activity Fair: Show 
children the connection between nutrition and 
physical activity with  a fair. Set up  booths that host 
nutrition  and  physical activity related  games that will  
encourage  children to try new foods and engage in 
physical activities.
Go Fish! Give  children practice  sorting foods into 
groups by playing  a game of Go Fish with food cards. 
Print food illustrations from FNS’ website (https://fns-
prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/tn/dmp_foodc 
ards.pdf)  and cut into cards. Put children into groups 
of  four  and distribute 30 cards to  each group. The 
dealer deals out four cards to each child in the group 
and places the rest of the deck in the middle. Each 
group is now  ready to play. The first child asks the 
child sitting to his or her left if he or she has a fruit. If 
the child has a fruit, the second child gives the card to 
the first child and the first child places the matched 
pair on  the table. The second  child  who gave up  the 
card picks up a card from the middle. He or she then 
asks the child to his or her left if they have a  
vegetable.  If the child does not have a vegetable, the 
child  says, “go fish” and  the child who asked for the 
card, will pick a card from the middle. The children 
continue to take turns and ask questions until all the 
pairs are found. The child with the most pairs wins.
What’s the Mystery Food? Place the child’s  hand in a 
paper bag containing a fruit or vegetable and ask him 
or  her to identify it. If he or  she cannot identify it, 
select several children to peek into the bag and 
provide clues.
66
LOCAL FOOD ACTIVITIES
Sponsors can pair local foods with fun nutrition and agriculture-based activities to keep children 
engaged in programming. Local foods tie into numerous activities that keep children nourished and 
excited, and help children learn more  about where  their food comes from and build healthy eating 
habits. Possible activities include:
• 
Growing or visiting edible gardens; 
• 
Taking a farm field trip or hosting farm visits; 
• 
Harvest of the Month or other special recognition 
of local  foods; and 
• 
Participating in taste tests or cooking 
demonstrations that  feature local foods.
For more tips and ideas on how to increase the 
nutritional quality and  build local foods-related 
enrichment activities into Summer Meals  Programs  
see SP 07-2016, SFSP 07-2016: Local Foods and 
Related Activities in Summer Meals Programs, with 
Questions and Answers 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/cn/SP0 
7_SFSP07-2016os.pdf).  In addition, visit USDA’s Farm 
to Summer website to find links to other helpful 
guidance and resources 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool/farm-
summer).
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Best Practice - Leveraging Existing School Gardens: 
Through its SFSP, Marion City School District provides 
educational activities that enable  kids to get their 
hands dirty and  learn about where food  comes from, 
while engaging families in adopting healthy habits. 
The Program does this by aligning summer meal sites 
with existing school gardens that are maintained by 
school staff and volunteers  over  the summer.  Children 
at all six of the city’s elementary school sites 
participate in  gardening activities like watering, 
weeding, and harvesting. Along with their families, 
kids also benefit from free gardening lessons provided 
by Master Gardeners. This approach  aligns summer 
meals with existing resources to create hands-on 
learning opportunities to keep children’s minds and 
bodies nourished  for the coming school year.
67
PROMOTING 
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Physical activity is not an SFSP requirement, sponsors are encouraged to provide opportunities for 
children to  be physically active.  Encourage children to take part in vigorous activities and join them 
whenever possible. Children need at least 60 minutes per day of moderate physical activity. It's 
important to encourage children to get in the habit of being physically active at a young age.
Physical activity helps children have 
fun and:
• 
Maintain a healthy weight; 
• 
Develop strong muscles, a healthy heart and 
lungs; 
• 
Strengthen bones; 
• 
Develop motor skills, balance, and 
coordination; 
• 
Develop positive attitudes; and 
• 
Improve self-esteem.
Physical activity burns calories, helps with weight 
control, and reduces the risk of certain chronic 
diseases, including high  blood pressure, stroke, 
coronary artery disease, type 2 diabetes, and 
osteoporosis later in life. An inactive lifestyle increases 
the risk of overweight and obesity as well as many 
chronic diseases. Include activities that  keep children 
moving at your summer site.
Children can be physically active by:
• 
Turning up the music and dancing; 
• 
Lifting and throwing balls; 
• 
Taking the stairs, both up and down; or 
• 
Swimming or playing basketball.
Tips for Promoting Physical Activity 
How can I help children be physically active every day?
• 
Be a good role model. Participate with children 
in activities and show them that you enjoy 
active play every day. 
• 
Create opportunities for safe, active play 
indoors and outdoors. Use toys and 
equipment that are the right size for the 
ages of the children.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
• 
Keep children moving. Encourage all  children 
to participate. 
• 
Help everyone be active. Plan activities that 
allow all children the opportunity to play, 
including those with special  needs. 
• 
Include movement and physical action in 
children’s indoor play and learning activities. 
• 
Be weather-ready. When weather is too 
severe for outdoor play, dance to music 
indoors and tell  or read stories that children 
act out physically. 
• 
Use space wisely. Many games and activities 
meant for outdoors and large spaces can be 
changed for use in limited, indoor spaces. For 
example, use  colored masking tape to create 
pathways for children  to follow as they jump  
or  walk.
What are some activities or games I can incorporate 
at my  summer site?
• 
Allow kids to roll, pass, or kick balls to each 
other. 
• 
Create an obstacle course. 
• 
Set up relay races or jumping games. 
• 
Play Octopus Tag! Draw two lines at least 20 
feet apart. When the “octopus” in the middle 
says “Hungry!” the other children (the “fish”) 
should try to cross  to the other side while the 
octopus tries to tag them. When a fish is 
tagged, he or she becomes the octopus’s arm 
and has to hold hands with the octopus, 
working  with him or her to try to tag the 
other fish. The last fish left wins! 
• 
Set up a hula-hoop  game. With all the 
children standing in a single file line, give the 
first child in the line one hula-hoop to hold
68
over  his or  her head. The child will pull the 
hula-hoop  down  over his or her body to the 
floor, step out of it,  and give the hoop to the 
next person in line. 
•  Act out different animals – hop  like a rabbit, 
jump like a kangaroo, or waddle like a duck! 
•  Teach children math, science, and language 
concepts through games involving movement. 
For example, children can learn to  count by 
tossing bean bags into a bowl. 
•  Plan a “movement parade.” March around 
the room or outside, while calling out  
different movements children  can  do: hop, 
skip, leap, twirl, twist, jump, stomp, and 
more. 
•  Provide two or more 5 to 10 minute periods  
of  adult- led active play or games to promote 
physical activity every day. Try “follow-the-
leader” or musical  movement games, such as 
“Head, Shoulders, Knees, and Toes,” “Hokey 
Pokey,” and “If You’re Happy and You Know 
It.”
Check out FNS’ Summer Food, Summer Moves 
Operator’s Guide for over 30 fun games and activities 
to do  at a Summer  site: 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/summer-food-summer-
moves-accessible-materials.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
69
SPOTLIGHT ON SUMMER 
FOOD SERVICE PROGRAMS
In Summer 2016 FNS launched the inaugural year of the Turnip the Beet award program. The goal of 
Turnip the Beet is to showcase summer  meal program sponsors who are going above and beyond to 
ensure their meals are  both nutritious and appetizing. In Summer 2016,  49 sponsors won Bronze, Silver, 
or Gold awards. This section highlights two 2016 Gold  award sponsors and the strategies used to 
enhance  the  quality of the  meals served.
Oakland Livingston Human Service 
Agency (OLHSA) 
OLHSA, A Community Action Agency in Pontiac, 
Michigan partners with  Unique Food  Management to 
provide local food for OLHSA’s Meet Up & Eat Up  
Program, delivering fresh,  local summer meals and 
nutrition  education to Pontiac’s youth. OLHSA uses 
evaluation criterion to favor bidders who have the  
ability to use and source unprocessed or minimally-
processed local agricultural products. Their summer 
menus feature fresh fruits and vegetables that 
primarily come from Eastern Market Produce in 
Detroit, Michigan. Eastern Market works directly with 
local  Michigan farmers to get the best produce at a 
reasonable price. All of the fresh fruit and vegetables 
are delivered to Unique Food Management, where it 
is assembled into summer lunch meals  for 
disbursement. During the summer, they regularly 
order strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, 
blueberries, pears, peaches, watermelon, honeydew, 
cantaloupe, apples, broccoli, carrots, celery, corn, 
cucumbers, romaine lettuce, onions, tomatoes and 
peppers! Yum!
Abilene Public Schools collaborates with their 
county’s Extension office to conduct fruit and 
vegetable taste tests during the summer growing 
season. Community gardeners  in Abilene donate 
unique fruits and vegetables for cooking 
demonstrations. Many participants had never even 
seen a purple potato, let alone tasted one! 
Each year, children plant either a chive or cilantro 
seed at the beginning of the summer program. As  
they return each week, children water and tend to 
the young plants and watch them grow. This year, 
they plan to plant cilantro, basil, and  mint under 
grow lights they received with the help of a grant. At 
the end of the season, they plan to use the cilantro 
in a salsa that will go with their summer meal.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Abilene Public Schools 
Abilene Public  Schools has a Farm to Summer 
program that features local food in summer meals as 
well as hands-on food, garden, and nutrition 
education. Director of Food & Nutrition Services, 
Kyleen Harris, says that in the summer, there are 
many opportunities to incorporate fresh, seasonal 
produce because fruits and  vegetables are widely 
available from farms in the region – like watermelon 
or  cantaloupe.
70
QUESTIONS 
AND ANSWERS
1. WHAT ARE THE DIETARY 
GUIDELINES FOR AMERICANS? 
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans (Dietary 
Guidelines) are the cornerstone  of federal 
nutrition  policy and nutrition  education. They 
are recommendations based on the most 
current scientific knowledge about diet, physical 
activity and other issues that impact the health 
of  individuals age 2 years old and older.
The Dietary  Guidelines answer the questions, 
“What should Americans eat?”, and “How 
should we prepare our food to keep it safe and 
wholesome? “The Dietary Guidelines are 
designed to help  Americans choose diets that 
will meet nutrient requirements, promote 
health, support active lives and reduce risk of 
chronic disease.
2. WHAT IS A MEAL PATTERN? 
A  meal pattern is a listing of food components 
and serving sizes  you are required to serve to 
children in the SFSP. Each component in each 
meal must be present in at least the minimum 
serving size in order for you to receive 
reimbursement for  that meal. Summer sites may 
also use offer versus serve (OVS).  This type of 
meal service allows children to decline a certain 
number of food items. When  the meal pattern  
requirements are followed, operators receive 
proper reimbursement, and children  receive a 
well-balanced, nutritious meal.
3. HOW CAN I IMPROVE THE QUALITY 
OF THE MEALS SERVED IN MY 
PROGRAM? 
Serving high-quality meals is important to ensure 
children are getting the nutrients they need. It 
also helps improve and maintain participation at 
a summer site. There are a variety of strategies
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
and resources available to help improve the 
quality of meals served  in SFSP and SSO. First, 
make sure the meals are appetizing to the 
children attending your summer site, 
such as culturally appropriate foods. In 
addition, adding more variety into your menus 
can help keep children excited about the food 
they are eating. Try using a cycle menu to offer 
a range of menus and foods, including some 
hot food items when possible.
Second, sponsors should, as much as possible, 
purchase foods that align  with the Dietary 
Guidelines recommendations for whole grains, 
lean proteins, low-fat dairy, and whole fruits 
and vegetables. Nutrient dense foods are the 
basis of a healthful eating pattern and  are 
typically more filling than refined grains and 
juice. Sites are encouraged to improve the 
reimbursable meals served by using fresher, 
healthier, more nutritious products, such as 
whole fruits and vegetables, lean meats, and 
unprocessed cheeses.
Third, sponsors can tap into local seasonal 
harvests to serve a variety of nutritious foods in 
their freshest  state. Incorporating local foods 
into summer meals keeps meals tasting great, 
and can also offer an educational opportunity 
to engage children in your program. For more 
information on finding and buying local  foods, 
visit the Farm to Summer website 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/farmtoschool/farm-
summer) and the Supporting Local Farmers  
section of the Summer Meals  Toolkit 
(http://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/summer-meals-
toolkit).
Fourth, sponsors should review SP 10,  SFSP 06-
2017,  Meal Service Requirements in Summer 
Meal Programs, with Questions and Answers
71
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/meal-service-
requirements-summer-meal-programs-questions-
and-answers-%E2%80%93-revised), Team 
Nutrition Resource Library 
(http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/resource-library), 
and Healthy Meals Resource System 
(https://healthymeals.nal.usda.gov)  for additional 
tips and ideas on how to improve the quality of 
meals, such as working with vendors or hosting 
taste tests to help introduce and get children 
excited about new foods and menus.
4.  HOW CAN I MAKE MEALTIME MORE 
“FUN”  FOR THE CHILDREN  I SERVE? 
There are  a lot of things you can do to make the  
eating experience  a more  pleasant one. The first 
thing to know is the children  themselves. Each 
child reacts differently to different foods, and  eats 
in his or her own way. Remember, never force a 
child to eat and be  sure  to give  them enough time  
to eat. The environment  you provide is important:  
a  clean area  with bright colors, age- appropriate 
seating, tables  and utensils  helps. Also, present 
attractive meals at the proper temperatures. 
Giving the  children quiet time  before meals and 
having them help  clean  up  afterwards can also 
help children have a positive meal experience.
5.  HOW CAN I “MARKET” MY MEALS 
TO THE CHILDREN? 
You can do all sorts of things to make the children 
look forward to the meal! Advertise the meal  with 
posters and  pictures or dress in  costumes for a 
special occasion or activity. Adding “go-with” food 
items to standard menus or serving ethnic foods 
are ways to spice up a meal, as well as an 
opportunity for  an educational lesson. Serving a 
familiar food in a new way, or serving the meal in 
a  different setting can also make mealtime fun!
6.  I  HAVE A FEW CHILDREN IN MY 
PROGRAM THAT NEED SPECIAL 
MEALS. WHAT  SHOULD I DO? 
Children with disabilities are entitled to receive 
modified meals from  the Program  and you are 
required to provide reasonable modifications to
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
the meals so the child  can benefit from the 
Program. If the modified meal does not meet the 
meal pattern requirements, the child’s parent or 
guardian must provide you with a medical 
statement addressing the  disability and how it 
should be accommodated. For more information 
on meal modifications, please see SFSP 10-2017  
Modifications to Accommodate Disabilities in 
the Child and Adult  Care Food Program and 
Summer Food Service Program 
(https://www.fns.usda.gov/modifications-
accommodate-disabilities-cacfp-and-sfsp).
7.  I  WANT TO GET THE MOST FOR MY 
FOOD DOLLAR. HOW CAN I 
ACCOMPLISH THAT? 
Careful planning and buying is the key to getting 
the most  from your food dollar. Purchasing high 
quality food  in  the proper amounts at the best 
possible price is what it’s all about! Buy food  
from suppliers who provide the best quality 
product and  offer food  that will help you meet 
the SFSP meal patterns and the Dietary 
Guidelines at a  reasonable price. When deciding 
what to buy, read the labels carefully, buy 
federally inspected meats and poultry, check 
packaging and expiration  dates, purchase only 
pasteurized  milk and  milk products and  juice and 
make sure perishable foods have been kept 
under refrigeration  and that frozen  food  has 
been  kept frozen. Review your cycle menu to see 
what recipes you’ll use and the items needed. 
Check your inventory and be sure to follow a 
grocery list when you make your purchases. 
USDA’s Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition 
Programs will help you determine the quantities 
of  food to  purchase. Check your inventory and 
be sure to follow a grocery list when you make 
your purchases. USDA’s Food Buying Guide for 
Child Nutrition Programs 
(http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/food-buying-
guide-for-child-nutrition-programs)  will help  you  
determine the quantities of food  to purchase.
72
PART TWO: FOOD SAFETY
TAKING PRECAUTIONS: 
FOOD SAFETY
•  IMPORTANCE OF FOOD SAFETY
•  GOOD PERSONAL HYGIENE
• FOOD SAFETY TEMPERATURES
• CLEANING AND SANITIZING
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
• MICROWAVE COOKING
• TRADITIONAL AND LOCALLY 
GROWN FOODS
• WHAT YOU SHOULD DO IF A 
CHILD BECOMES SICK
73
IMPORTANCE OF 
FOOD SAFETY
The food safety information presented in this section may or may not apply to all summer meal sites, 
so adapt it to your summer meal program as applicable. The focus is on three areas to promote key 
food safety practices essential to a successful summer meal site:
• Practicing good personal hygiene, 
• Checking and documenting food safety temperatures, 
• Proper cleaning and sanitizing.
These practices help ensure that the food children consume is safe and reduce the risk of a foodborne 
outbreak. A foodborne outbreak at a summer meal site could result in multiple children and staff 
becoming sick, bad publicity, and possibly cause the shutdown of the site.
What is foodborne illness? 
Foodborne illness is illness that comes from eating 
food contaminated with harmful bacteria or other 
pathogens. Symptoms may occur within  hours, days, 
or  weeks and are often similar to gastrointestinal 
illness or “stomach flu” like symptoms. A person with 
a  foodborne illness may experience symptoms such as 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or fever.
Who is at risk for foodborne illnesses? 
Everyone is at risk for getting a foodborne illness. 
Young children are especially at risk for foodborne 
illnesses because their bodies and immune systems 
are still developing. Women who are pregnant, the 
elderly, and those who have chronic illnesses or 
compromised immune systems are also at high risk 
for getting a foodborne illness.
How do bacteria get in food? 
Microorganisms may be present on food products 
when you purchase them, or food can become 
contaminated during preparation. Thousands of types 
of bacteria are naturally present in our  environment. 
Microorganisms that cause disease are called 
pathogens. When certain pathogens enter the food  
supply and are eaten, they cause foodborne illness. 
During food preparation, food can become cross-
contaminated with pathogens transferred from raw 
egg products, raw meat, poultry, and seafood
products and their juices, other contaminated
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
products and their juices,  or from food handlers with 
poor personal hygiene. Most cases of foodborne 
illness can be prevented with proper cooking or 
processing of food to destroy pathogens, and safe 
food handling practices.
It is also important to have a date marking system in 
place. Date marking is a way to control the growth of 
Listeria, a bacterium that grows at refrigeration 
temperatures. A date marking system identifies how 
old foods are and when those foods should be 
discarded before these bacteria can cause a 
foodborne illness. A sample Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for date marking ready-to-eat, 
potentially hazardous foods can be found in the 
Reference Section.  If you suspect cases of foodborne 
illness at your SFSP site(s), follow the procedures 
outlined in the Reference Section.
74
GOOD PERSONAL HYGIENE
Personal Hygiene 
Personal hygiene is especially important for 
keeping food safe. This includes restricting or 
excluding ill staff from preparing or handling 
food, using effective handwashing procedures, 
and eliminating bare hand contact with ready-
to-eat foods. Using all three practices together 
will help prevent foodborne illness at a summer 
meal site. Each practice will be covered more in 
the following pages.
Good personal hygiene  begins with arriving to a 
summer meal site properly dressed. This  
minimizes possible contamination from  dirty 
clothes. When working for a summer meal site, 
follow these guidelines for proper attire.
• 
Come to the site dressed in clean  
clothes. 
• 
Wear close-toed shoes. 
• 
Restrain hair with a hat or hairnet. 
• 
Trim fingernails short, and do not wear 
nail polish. 
• 
Do not wear jewelry. 
• 
Summer site staff must also follow 
guidance from the local health authority 
regarding proper attire.
Employee  Health  
If you are sick, you may spread your illness to 
those around you (staff, children). Site staff 
should tell the site manager if they are sick. 
Report these illness symptoms:
• 
Vomiting, 
• 
Diarrhea, 
• 
Sore throat with fever, 
• 
Jaundice, 
• 
Open cuts, sores, or wounds, 
• 
Foodborne illness diagnosed by a doctor.
If you experience any of the above symptoms 
you should not work at the site to prevent the 
risk of spreading disease through food.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
How to Wash Hands 
Keeping hands clean  is one of the most 
important steps to avoid spreading germs to 
others. Many diseases and conditions are spread 
by not washing hands with  soap  and clean, 
running water. Follow the steps for proper  
handwashing:
1. Wet hands with water and soap. 
2. Lather hands  with soap up to elbows, 
and scrub for 10-15 seconds. 
3. Wash backs of hands, wrists, between 
fingers, and under fingernails. 
4. Rinse hands under running water. 
5. Dry hands with a paper towel or air 
dryer. 
6. Turn off water with a paper towel. If 
applicable, open the door with the paper 
towel, and then discard it into trashcan.
Proper handwashing should take a total of about 
20  seconds, or as long as it takes to sing the 
“Happy Birthday”  song twice.
Washing hands with soap and water is the best 
method for reducing the number of microbes on 
hands. If soap and  water are not available, the 
CDC recommends using an alcohol-based hand 
sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
When to Wash Hands 
There are certain times that staff should wash 
their hands.
Before
• 
Working with food, 
• 
Putting on or changing disposable 
gloves, and 
• 
Handling clean dishes, equipment, and 
utensils.
75
After
•  Using the toilet, 
•  Sneezing, coughing, or using a  
handkerchief or tissue,  
•  Touching hair, face, or body, 
•  Handling raw meats, poultry, or  fish, 
•  Eating, drinking, or chewing gum, 
•  Cleaning up – sweeping, mopping, 
or wiping counters, 
•  Touching dirty dishes, equipment, 
or utensils, 
•  Handling trash, 
•  Handling phones or cell phones, 
•  Handling cash registers or money, and 
•  Any instance in which hands  have 
become contaminated.
Portable hand washing station 
It is important to create a source of running 
water when summer sites do not have 
handwashing facilities. A portable handwashing 
station allows  you to wash hands when there is  
no working sink on-site. These facilities should 
be used  primarily for handwashing. You  can  
create a portable handwashing station like the 
one shown in the photo.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Proper glove use 
Properly wearing gloves can prevent 
contaminating food. Glove use protects food 
from microbes found on people’s hands. 
Handling something other than food with 
gloved hands, such as a cell phone, door 
handle, or refrigerator door can contaminate 
gloves. Remove contaminated gloves, and 
wash your hands before putting  on new  
gloves. 
Follow these tips to ensure  that you are  
using gloves properly.
•  Always wash hands before putting 
on gloves. 
•  Wear gloves when handling ready-to-
eat foods. Ready-to-eat foods are  
foods that can be eaten without 
further rinsing or cooking, such as  
fresh fruits and vegetables, 
sandwiches, and cheese. 
•  Never re-use or wash gloves. 
•  Dispose of soiled gloves. 
•  Change gloves after sneezing, 
coughing, or touching face, hair, or 
other parts of  the body. 
•  Change gloves if touching something 
other than food, such as  a cell phone, 
door handle, trashcan, cash  register, 
or  money. 
•  If you do not have gloves, you can still 
protect ready-to-eat food from hand 
contamination by using suitable 
utensils such  as spatulas, tongs, or 
deli tissue.
76
FOOD SAFETY 
TEMPERATURES
Temperature Danger Zone 
One of the most important ways to keep food safe is by controlling time and temperature. The temperature 
danger zone, which is 41 ˚F to 135 ˚F, is the temperature range where bacteria grow rapidly. Bacteria can 
double in  number in as little as 20 minutes. At this rate, harmful bacteria in food can  quickly multiply to a 
level capable of causing foodborne illness. It is important to keep hot food above 135 °F and cold food below 
41  °F, and keep all perishable food out of the danger zone. Use a thermometer to ensure food stays out of 
the temperature danger zone.
Appliance thermometers are used to measure the 
inside temperature of refrigerators and freezers. 
Although a piece of equipment may come with an 
internal thermometer, it is a best practice to have a 
separate appliance thermometer to guarantee the 
equipment is functioning as intended. Place the  
thermometer in the warmest part of the equipment, 
such as near the top shelf, and close to the door. 
You can use appliance thermometers in equipment  
used to transport food to different summer sites. 
For coolers used for transporting cold food, place the 
thermometer in the warmest  part, for example near 
the door or lid. For containers used for transporting 
hot food, place the thermometer in the coolest part, 
for example near the door or lid.
Thermometer Basics 
Thermometers are an essential tool when cooking 
and serving food. They come in all shapes, colors, 
and sizes, and perform a variety of functions. There 
are several different types of thermometers. See 
below for more information on  different types of 
thermometers.
Food thermometers are used to measure the 
temperature of the food. They measure food 
temperatures to verify safety. These thermometers 
need to be calibrated, or adjusted for accuracy, on  a 
regular basis; conditions such as dropping a 
thermometer or  extreme temperatures could affect 
their accuracy.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
77
CALIBRATING A  THERMOMETER
When do you calibrate a thermometer?
• 
Ideally, daily, but at least weekly. 
• 
When a thermometer is dropped. 
• 
More often if specified by the State or 
local  health department
As a best practice, record when you calibrate 
thermometers on sheets such as logs. This provides 
evidence that proper food safety practices were followed 
in the event a foodborne outbreak does occur. Use 
temperature logs to record temperatures of refrigerators 
and freezers, cooked food, and transported food. Samples 
of these temperature logs are in the reference section.
How to calibrate a digital thermometer – 
Ice Water Method
1. Fill a large container with ice. 
2. Add water to within 1 inch  of top of container. 
3. Stir mixture well. 
4. Let the mixture sit for one minute. 
5. Place thermometer in container so that the 
sensing area of stem or probe (usually indicated 
by a dimple)  is completely submerged in the 
water. 
6. Keep the thermometer from touching the sides 
or  bottom of  the container. 
7. Let thermometer stay in ice water for 30 seconds. 
8. Digital thermometers generally have a reset 
button  to push. The display should  read 32 °F. 
9. Repeat the process with each thermometer, and 
record on the log.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
78
How to Take Temperatures
1.
Before each use, wash the stem of the thermometer with soap and water and sanitize by dipping stem into
sanitizing solution or wiping with a sanitizing wipe. Allow to air dry.
2.
Because there are many different types of foods, use the temperature-taking method appropriate for each food.
Make sure the sensing area of the food thermometer (indicated by a dimple) is submerged in the food when
taking a temperature. The proper way to take the temperature of certain foods is listed below:
•
Roasts—insert thermometer in the middle of the roast, avoiding any bones.
•
Poultry—insert thermometer at  the thickest part, avoiding any bones.
•
Casseroles—check temperature in the center and at several other points.
•
Thin meats, such as hamburger patties—insert thermometer into the side of food until  2-3 inches deep.
•
Milk - Open a carton and insert thermometer at least 2 inches into the milk.
•
Packaged foods – Place the thermometer between two packages without puncturing
the packages.
3.
Wait for the temperature display to stay the same temperature for about 15 seconds.
Receiving temperatures 
It is important to  check the temperature of  frozen or  refrigerated foods immediately upon receipt. Check frozen foods 
to make sure that they are frozen solid and show no signs of thawing and refreezing, such as boxes being wet  or foods 
having large ice crystals.
Check  temperatures of refrigerated foods.
•
Fresh meat and poultry should be 41 °F  or below.
•
Packaged products should be 41 °F or below.
•
Milk and eggs should be 45 °F or below. Milk  must be put in a 41 °F or lower cooler
after receipt.
•
Move foods to storage quickly, beginning with refrigerated foods, then frozen foods,
then foods for dry storage.
•
Contact the site manager if food is not delivered at the proper temperature.
Cooking temperatures 
To prevent the growth of microorganisms and reduce the risk of foodborne illness, food service 
staff must ensure certain cooking temperatures  are reached.
Temperature and Time 
Food Items
•
Fresh, frozen, or canned fruits and vegetables that will be held hot prior to
service.
135 °F for 15 Seconds 
•
Ready-to-eat food that has been commercially  prepared (to reheat for hot
holding)
•
Whole cuts of beef and pork; seafood
145 °F for 15 Seconds
•
Ground products containing beef, pork, or  fish
•
Fish nuggets or sticks
155 °F  for 15 Seconds 
•
Cubed or Salisbury steaks
•
Eggs cooked for hot holding
•
Poultry
165 °F  for 15 Seconds 
•
Studded beef, pork, or seafood
•
Pasta stuffed with beef, eggs, pork, or seafood, such as lasagna or ravioli
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
79
Holding Food/Transporting Food Temperatures
• 
Once a food is prepared, it must be held hot at 135 °F or above or cold at 41 °F or below until 
served. Maintain these temperatures  when transporting food to another site. Use an appliance 
thermometer to be sure that refrigerators or portable coolers are at the correct temperatures. 
• 
Milk and items like sandwiches containing deli meat should arrive cold to the summer feeding site. 
• 
Use a food thermometer to check the temperature of perishable food to ensure it is at the right 
temperature – hot food at 135 °F or above and cold food at 41 °F or below. 
• 
Contact the site manager if the food is not delivered at the proper temperature.
NOTE:
Some sponsors make use of microwave cooking. Microwave ovens heat the surfaces of food 
quickly, but leave food with "cold spots" that could support the growth of harmful bacteria. It 
is recommended that large cuts of meat not be prepared in the microwave. It is important to 
become familiar with the manufacturer's instructions so that food cooks thoroughly and 
evenly in the microwave. In addition, follow these microwave safety tips:
• 
Cover food to hold in moisture, cook evenly, and keep microwave clean. 
• 
If microwave does not have a turntable, stir food several times during heating. 
• 
Allow food cooked in the microwave to stand covered for 2 minutes after heating. 
• 
Check the internal temperature of food in several places to verify that food has 
reached a safe internal temperature of 165 °F in all parts of food.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
80
Cooling Temperatures 
Safely cool hot, cooked foods within the recommended timeframes. Food passes through the temperature 
danger zone as it cools. It is important to get it through  the temperature danger zone as quickly as possible 
to prevent  bacteria from growing in the food.
• 
Hot food must be cooled from 135 °F to 70 °F within 2 hours. 
• 
It must then be cooled from 70 °F to 41 °F in the next 4 hours (food must be cooled from 135 °F 
to 41 °F within a total of 6 hours). 
• 
Food at room temperature must be cooled to 41 °F within 4  hours. 
• 
If cooling times and temperatures are not met, the food must be reheated to 165 °F for 15 
seconds and the cooling process started again.
Methods for Cooling Food
• 
Pre-chill ingredients used for making salads and other ready-to-eat foods. 
• 
Separate food into smaller portions and place in shallow containers that are no more than 
2  inches deep. 
• 
Cool food loosely covered on top shelf of freezer. Heat must be allowed to escape. 
• 
Use chill sticks/ice paddles and ice water baths. Ensure cooling food is stirred frequently 
to allow heat to escape. (Image 2.)
Reheating Temperatures 
Reheating food requires food to go through the temperature danger zone. Reheat foods to 165 °F 
for 15 seconds within 2 hours to destroy microorganisms in the food.
Example of a cooling method 
Example of a cooling method
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
81
CLEANING AND SANITIZING
Cleaning Tables, Work Surfaces, 
and Equipment 
Be sure all food preparation occurs on a clean and 
sanitized surface. This reduces  the risk of food 
becoming contaminated by microorganisms. Use a 
3-step process to make sure all surfaces that will 
come in contact with food are clean.
1. Wash surface with soap and water solution. 
2. Rinse surface with clean water to remove 
debris and soap. 
3. Sanitize surface using a sanitizing solution 
mixed at the concentration specified on the 
manufacturer’s label. Allow items to air dry.
Summer sponsors must always
follow State and local health
department requirements.
How to Use a Three-Compartment Sink 
Each compartment of a three-compartment sink 
has a specific purpose. The first compartment is for 
washing, the second is for rinsing, and the third is 
for sanitizing.  Sanitize by immersing items in hot 
water at or above 171 °F for 30 seconds or by using 
a chemical sanitizing solution mixed at a  
concentration specified on the manufacturer’s 
label. If using chemical sanitizer, test the sanitizer 
concentration using an appropriate test strip to 
confirm that the sanitizer is the strength required 
to kill microorganisms, but not so strong as to 
damage equipment and utensils. If you have a 2-
compartment sink, work with your local health 
department to come up with an approved standard 
operating procedure.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Using a Dishmachine
• 
Scrape food particles into trashcan before  
loading dishwasher. 
• 
Do not overload dish rack. 
• 
Dishmachine final rinse cycle temperature 
should be at 160 °F or above if using heat to 
sanitize utensils.
• 
Check the temperature gauge on 
the machine. 
• 
Do a secondary check using a heat 
sensitive tape, one-time 
temperature indicator or high 
temperature thermometer 
(thermometer approved  to use in  
a dishmachine). 
• 
Doing these checks will ensure that 
appropriate temperatures for 
sanitizing are reached. 
• 
If dishmachine uses a chemical sanitizer, 
check the sanitizer concentration of the 
rinse water  using appropriate test strips.
• 
Ask the dishmachine manufacturer 
what kind of sanitizing strips to use. 
• 
Always wash hands before handling clean 
and sanitized dishes, equipment, and 
utensils. NEVER load dirty dishes and then 
handle clean dishes without washing hands.
82
MICROWAVE COOKING
Some summer food service sponsors use microwaves to cook  in small kitchens or when a kitchen 
is not available. Microwave ovens heat the surfaces of food quickly, but leave food with "cold 
spots" that could support the growth of harmful bacteria. It is recommended that large cuts of 
meat not be prepared in the microwave.
It is important to become familiar with the manufacturer's information so that food cooks thoroughly and 
evenly in the microwave. In addition, follow these microwave safety tips:
• 
Cover food to hold in moisture, cook evenly, and keep microwave clean. 
• 
If microwave does not have a turntable, stir food several times during heating. 
• 
Allow food cooked in the microwave to stand covered for 2 minutes after heating. 
• 
Check the internal temperature of food in several places to verify that food has reached 
a safe internal temperature of 165 °F in all parts of food.
A  Thermometer  Graphic, a Daily Temperature Form-Internal Food Temperature,
and a Storage Temperature Form can be found in the Reference  Section.
TRADITIONAL AND 
LOCALLY GROWN FOODS
FNS encourages sponsors to source locally grown and raised foods, and to incorporate 
traditional foods into their summer menus.  While traditional and locally grown foods pose no 
greater food safety risk  than conventional products, it remains important for SFSP operators to 
understand  the applicable food safety requirements.
Three agencies within the Federal Government are responsible for establishing rules and regulations that 
govern the sale and use of meat, poultry, game, and eggs in the Child Nutrition Programs: the USDA Food 
Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS), the Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS) Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), and the USDA Food and Nutrition Service (FNS). Together these agencies establish 
rules and regulations to  ensure that all products served  in CNP meals and to consumers, are safe, 
wholesome, and correctly labeled and packaged.
In turn, State and local governments adopt Federal regulations and guidelines and often tailor the rules to 
address locality-specific issues. The memorandum SP01-2016, CACFP 01-2016, SFSP 01-2016 Procuring Local 
Meat, Poultry, Game, and Eggs in Child Nutrition Programs (http://www.fns.usda.gov/procuring-local-meat-
poultry-game-and-eggs-child-nutrition-programs) aims to help Child Nutrition Program operators 
understand traditional and  locally grown food safety requirements and aid them in purchasing from local 
ranchers and producers as much as possible.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
83
WHAT YOU SHOULD DO 
IF A CHILD BECOMES SICK
What should I do if I suspect a child at my site has a foodborne illness? 
Unfortunately, there may be a time when, despite the best of intentions, a child may become ill as 
a  result of the food s/he eats. Here are some guidelines to follow if you suspect a  child is suffering  
from a foodborne illness.
1.  Get the following information: 
•  Name(s) of the child(ren). 
•  Name of parent  or guardian. 
•  Parent’s or guardian’s telephone number. 
•  When the child ate last (the date and time). 
•  What the child ate last (include everything  eaten). 
•  Whether anything tasted bad when it was eaten. 
•  What time the child began to feel ill, including the symptoms. 
•  Seal and keep all leftovers of the suspected food(s)  and mark “DO NOT USE.” 
2.  Contact the parent or guardian immediately. 
3.  Call the local or  State Health Department and inform them of the incident. They will direct you on what to 
do with the child and the suspected food(s).
For more information about food safety in SFSP, visit the Institute of Child
Nutrition’s Food Safety for Summer Food Service Programs
(https://theicn.org/icn-resources-a-z/food-safety).
The training guide and materials prepare staff and volunteers  of SFSPs  to provide
safe foods  and to teach  children  basic food  safety practices.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
84
PART TWO: FOOD SAFETY
KEEP FOOD FRESH: FOOD 
STORAGE AND SANITATION
•  FOOD STORAGE
•  FOOD SANITATION
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
85
FOOD STORAGE
Storage Facilities
Good storage facilities (dry, frozen, and refrigerated) help keep food safe, fresh, and appetizing. 
Food products  must be in excellent condition when they arrive at the receiving area. They must 
be kept that way as you store, prepare, and serve them.
Guidelines for Proper Storage
• 
Examine all food upon delivery to be sure it is not spoiled, dirty, infested with insects, or opened. 
Do not accept or use cans with bulges or without labels. Do not accept frozen foods that have 
started to thaw. Send these items  back. 
• 
Store all food off the floor on clean racks, dollies, or other clean surfaces. Pallets and dollies should 
be at least 6 inches off the floor to permit cleaning under them. 
• 
Keep storage rooms clean, sanitary, and free from rodent infestations. Clean on a rotating schedule 
to ensure that  regular cleaning is done consistently. 
• 
Protect foods such as flour,  cereals,  cornmeal, sugar,  dry beans, and dry peas from rodents and 
insects by storing them in tightly covered containers. 
• 
Make sure refrigerated and frozen storage areas are maintained at proper temperatures. 
• 
Use foods on a "first-in, first-out" basis. Arrange foods so  that older  supplies will be used first. 
Label shelves if necessary.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
86
FOOD SANITATION
Food Sanitation Tips
Follow these tips to ensure a safe and clean environment for serving food to children:
• 
Thoroughly rinse all fresh fruits and 
vegetables with water before cooking 
or serving. Do not use soap, as it can 
leave residue. 
• 
Do not handle ready-to-eat foods with bare  
hands. Use disposable plastic gloves. 
Dispose of gloves that become 
contaminated (e.g., by touching equipment 
or  handling money). 
• 
Food service staff with open cuts, sores, 
colds or other contagious illnesses, or 
experiencing foodborne illness symptoms 
should not prepare or serve food. 
• 
Properly clean and sanitize all food 
preparation  and service areas; wipe up  
spilled food immediately.
Cleanup
Give  careful attention to cleanup procedures following food preparation and service. If you use disposable 
ware (For example, dishes, trays, utensils, glasses), promptly and carefully remove the disposable items 
from the site. If you use permanent ware, make sure to wash and sanitize them after each use.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
• 
Empty garbage cans daily. They should be 
kept tightly covered and thoroughly cleaned. 
Use plastic or paper liners. 
• 
Meet health standards set by your State and 
local health department.
Visit the Institute of Child Nutrition’s Employee 
Health and Personal Hygiene for Child Nutrition 
Professionals  website (https://theicn.org/icn-
resources-a-z/employee-health-and-personal-
hygiene/) for more resources that highlight best 
practices for child nutrition employees in schools 
and in child care to use to prevent spreading 
pathogens that can  cause foodborne illnesses.
87
Cleaning and Sanitizing
In addition to the cleanup of disposable or permanent ware, you must properly clean and sanitize food 
preparation and service areas (equipment, floors). A cleaning schedule should be part of the overall 
work schedule to assure that the site is cleaned regularly. If serving  meals outdoors, clean picnic tables  
and serving tables, or cover with disposable table cloths.
What's the difference between cleaning and anitizing? 
 s
Cleaning is removing food, grease, sauces, dirt and dust from a surface, generally with a detergent and 
water. Sanitizing is the reduction of bacteria and viruses that may be on a  surface with a special solution. 
Household bleach is a sanitizer that is inexpensive and is approved by your local health department. Make 
sure to sanitize food preparation areas, tables, countertops, cutting boards, drying racks, and sinks. 
Sanitize surfaces using a sanitizing solution mixed at the concentration specified on the manufacturer’s 
label. Allow items to air dry. And, as always, follow State and local health department requirements.
For more information on cleaning and sanitizing, refer to the Reference Section.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
88
Sample Food Safety Checklist
Observer: _______________________________________________ Date:_________________________
Directions:  Use this checklist daily. Determine areas in your operations requiring corrective action. 
Record corrective action taken and keep completed records in a notebook for future reference.
PERSONAL HYGINE 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Employees wear clean and proper uniform 
including shoes.
Effective hair restraints are properly worn.
Fingernails are short, unpolished, and clean 
(no artificial nails).
Jewelry is limited to a plain ring, such as 
wedding band and a watch and must be covered 
by a foodservice glove.
Hands are washed properly, frequently, and 
at appropriate times.
Burns, wounds, sores or scabs or splints and 
water-proof bandages on  hands are bandaged 
and completely covered with a  foodservice 
glove while handling  food.
Eating, drinking, chewing gum, smoking, or 
using tobacco is allowed  only in  designated 
areas away from preparation, service, storage, 
and ware washing areas.
Employees use disposable tissues when 
coughing or sneezing and then immediately 
wash hands.
Employees appear in good health.
Hand sinks are unobstructed, operational, 
and clean.
Hand sinks are stocked with soap, disposable 
towels, and warm water.
A  hand washing reminder sign is posted.
Employee restrooms are operational and clean.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
89
FOOD PREPARATION 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
All food stored or prepared in facility is from 
approved sources.
Food equipment, utensils, and food contact 
surfaces  are properly washed, rinsed, and 
sanitized before every use.
Frozen food is thawed under refrigeration, or in 
cold running water, and is cooked to proper 
temperature.
Thawed food is not refrozen.
Preparation is planned so ingredients are kept 
out of  the temperature danger  zone.
Food is tasted using the proper procedure.
Procedures are in place to  prevent cross-
contamination.
Food is handled with suitable utensils, 
such as  single use gloves  or tongs.
Food is prepared in small batches to limit the 
time it  is in the temperature danger zone.
Clean reusable towels are used only for 
sanitizing equipment and surfaces and not 
for drying hands, utensils, or floor.
Food is cooked to the required safe internal 
temperature for the appropriate time. The 
temperature is tested with a calibrated food 
thermometer.
The internal  temperature of food being cooked 
is monitored and documented.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
90
HOT HOLDING 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Hot holding unit is clean.
Food is heated to the required safe internal 
temperature before placing in hot holding. Hot 
holding units are not used  to reheat potentially 
hazardous foods.
Hot holding unit is pre-heated before hot food 
is placed in unit.
Temperature of hot food being held is at or 
above 135 F
COLD HOLDING 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Refrigerators are kept clean and organized.
Temperature of cold food being held is at or 
below 41 F
REFRIGERATOR, FREEZER,
AND MILK COOLER
Thermometers are available and accurate.
Temperature is appropriate for pieces 
of  equipment.
Food is stored 6 inches  off floor or in walk-in 
cooling equipment.
Refrigerator and freezer units are clean
and neat.
Proper chilling procedures are used.
All food is properly wrapped, labeled, and dated.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
91
REFRIGERATOR, FREEZER,
AND MILK COOLER 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
The FIFO (First in, First Out) method of 
inventory management is used.
Ambient air temperature of all refrigerators and 
freezers is monitored and documented at the 
beginning and  end  of each  shift.
FOOD STORAGE AND DRY  STORAGE 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Temperature of dry storage area is 
between  50 F and 70 F or meets State public 
health  department requirement.
All food and paper supplies are stored 6 to 8 
inches off the floor.
All food is labeled with name and received date.
Open bags of food are stored in containers with 
tight  fitting lids and labeled with common name.
The FIFO (First In, First Out) method of 
inventory management is issued.
There are no bulging or leaking canned goods.
Chemicals are clearly labeled and stored away 
from food and food-related supplies.
There is a regular cleaning schedule 
for all food surfaces.
Food is stored in original container 
or  a food grade container.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
92
CLEANING AND SANITIZING 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Three-compartment sink is properly set 
up  for ware washing
Dish machine is working properly (such as 
gauges and chemicals are at recommended 
levels).
Water is clean and free of grease 
and food particles.
Water temperatures are correct for
wash and rinse.
If heat sanitizing, the utensils are allowed to 
remain immersed in 171 F water for  30 seconds
If using a chemical sanitizer, it is mixed 
correctly and a sanitizer strip is used to 
test chemical concentration.
Smallware and utensils are allowed to air dry.
Wiping cloths are stored in sanitizing solution 
while in use.
UTENSILS  AND EQUIPMENT 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
All small equipment and utensils, including  
cutting boards and knives, are cleaned and  
sanitized between uses.
Small equipment and utensils are washed,  
sanitized, and air-dried.
Work surfaces and utensils are clean.
Work surfaces are cleaned and  
sanitized between uses.
Thermometers are cleaned and  
sanitized after each use.
Thermometers are calibrated on a routine basis.
Can opener is clean.
Drawers and racks are clean.
Clean utensils are handled in a manner to  
prevent contamination of areas that will be in   
direct contact with food  or a person’s mouth.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
93
LARGE EQUIPMENT 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Food slicer is clean.
Food slicer is  broken down, cleaned, and 
sanitized before and after every use.
Boxes, containers, and recyclables are 
removed from site.
Loading dock and area  around dumpsters are 
clean.
Exhaust hood and filters are clean.
GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Kitchen garbage cans are  clean and 
kept covered.
Garbage cans are  emptied as necessary.
Boxes and containers are removed from site.
Loading dock and area around dumpsters 
are clean.
Dumpsters are clean.
PEST CONTROL 
YES 
NO 
CORRECTIVE ACTION
Outside doors have screens, are well-sealed, and 
are equipped with a  self-closing device.
No evidence of pests is present.
There is a regular schedule of pest control 
by a licensed  pest control operator.
Source:  National Food Service Management Institute. (2009). Serving it  safe training resource. 
University, MS.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
94
QUESTIONS 
AND ANSWERS
1. HOW SHOULD I STORE THE FOODS 
I  PURCHASE? 
Proper storage will keep the foods you 
buy safe, fresh, and appetizing. Check 
the condition of all foods when they are 
delivered, and store them in the proper 
environment. Dry foods must be  stored 
in a dry area, off of the floor, and 
refrigerated or frozen foods must be 
stored in refrigerators  or freezers under 
the proper temperatures. It is important  
to keep all food storage areas orderly, 
clean, sanitary, and free from rodent or 
insect infestation, and to rotate your 
foods on  a “first-in, first out” basis. 
Keeping inventory records will also help 
you in knowing what foods you have on 
hand, what you’ll need to buy, as well as 
tracking food costs.
1. HOW SHOULD I STORE THE FOODS 
I PURCHASE? 
Proper storage will keep the foods you buy safe, 
fresh, and appetizing. Check the condition of all 
foods when they are delivered, and store them 
in the proper environment. Dry foods must be 
stored in a dry area, off of the floor, and 
refrigerated or frozen foods must be stored in 
refrigerators or freezers under the proper 
temperatures. It is important to keep all food 
storage areas orderly, clean, sanitary, and free 
from rodent or insect infestation, and to rotate 
your foods on a “first in, first out” basis. Keeping 
inventory records will also help you in knowing 
what foods you have on hand, what you’ll need 
to buy, as well as tracking food costs. 
 
 
2. I WANT TO BE SURE I MAINTAIN A 
CLEAN KITCHEN. HOW CAN I 
ACCOMPLISH THIS? 
Proper sanitation will go a long way in 
preventing or reducing the risk of foodborne 
illness. Washing hands thoroughly with warm, 
soapy water before handling foods or utensils is 
absolutely necessary. You should wash and 
sanitize all dishes, utensils, equipment and work 
surfaces. Wearing clean uniforms and hairnets 
using disposable gloves, and adhering to local 
and state health codes are important things to 
keep in mind. Be sure to immediately clean up 
any spilled foods, and empty garbage cans daily. 
Make sure those cans have covers and are lined 
with plastic or paper.
2. I WANT TO BE SURE I  MAINTAIN A 
CLEAN KITCHEN. HOW CAN I 
ACCOMPLISH THIS? 
Proper sanitation will go a long way in 
preventing or reducing the risk of  
foodborne illness. Washing hands 
thoroughly with warm, soapy water 
before handling foods or utensils is 
absolutely necessary. You should wash 
and sanitize all dishes, utensils, 
equipment and work surfaces. Wearing 
clean uniforms and hairnets using 
disposable gloves, and  adhering to local 
and state health codes are important 
things to keep in mind. Be sure to
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
immediately clean up any spilled foods, 
and empty garbage cans daily. Make 
sure those cans have covers and are 
lined with plastic or  paper.
3. DO I NEED TO BE CONCERNED 
WITH FOOD SAFETY? 
Yes! It is extremely important for you to take 
every precaution against foodborne illness, 
an illness that comes from eating food 
contaminated with harmful bacteria or other 
pathogens. Food stored, cooked, held, or 
handled at improper temperatures allow 
bacteria to grow to dangerous levels. The 
best way to combat foodborne illness is to 
make sure foods are stored, handled, and 
cooked at the right temperature, and making 
sure cold foods are kept cold (at or below 
41 °F), and that hot foods are kept hot (at 
135°F or above). Never let perishable foods 
remain in the Danger zone temperature (41 
°F to 135°F) any longer than necessary. 
Ensure that all food preparation surfaces 
and utensils are clean at all times, and use 
food thermometers to check foods when 
cooking, handling, and serving food.
3. DO I NEED TO BE CONCERNED  
WITH FOOD SAFETY? 
Yes! It is extremely important for you to  
take every precaution against  foodborne 
illness, an illness that comes from eating 
food contaminated  with  harmful 
bacteria or other pathogens. Food 
stored, cooked, held, or handled at 
improper  temperatures allow bacteria 
to grow to dangerous levels. The best  
way to combat  foodborne illness is to 
make sure foods are stored, handled, 
and cooked at the right temperature, 
and  making sure cold foods are kept cold  
(at or below 41 °F), and that hot foods 
are kept hot (at 135°F or above). Never 
let perishable foods remain in the 
Danger zone temperature (41 °F to 
135°F) any longer than necessary. Ensure 
that  all food preparation surfaces and 
utensils are clean at all times, and  use 
food thermometers to check foods when  
cooking, handling, and serving food.
95
REFERENCE 
SECTION
•  SAMPLE SUMMER MENU 
CHECKLIST
•  EXHIBIT A: GRAIN 
REQUIREMENTS FOR CHILD 
NUTRITION PROGRAMS
•  CHOKING RISKS
•  HOW TO READ NUTRITION 
LABELS
•  SOURCES OF NUTRIENTS
•  SERVING SIZES AND YIELDS FOR 
VEGETABLES
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
•  KEEP THESE FOOD SAFETY RULES 
IN MIND
•  FOOD SERVICE EQUIPMENT NEEDS
•  SAMPLE FOOD INVENTORY 
RECORD
•  FOOD INVENTORY RECORD 
INSTRUCTIONS
•  SAMPLE SPECIFICATION BID
•  SAMPLE DAILY TEMPERATURE 
FORM - INTERNAL FOOD 
TEMPERATURES
96
Sample Summer Menu Checklist
Evaluate menus on a weekly and monthly basis.
1.
Have you included all food components in the minimum
portion sizes as specified  by the USDA?
2.
Have you varied foods from day to day and week
to week?
3.
Do meals include a variety of foods with a balance
of  color, texture, shape, flavor, and temperature?
4.
Have you included fresh fruits and vegetables, and
whole-grain products often?
5.
Have you considered the children’s likes and dislikes,
cultural, and ethnic practices?
6.
Have you chosen foods lower in solid  fats (saturated
and trans fats?)
7.
Have you chosen foods with minimal added sugars?
8.
Have you chosen foods lower in salt (sodium)?
9.
Have you included local or regional foods when possible?
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Yes 
No
97
Grains and Breads
1. 
In NSLP and SBP (grades K-12), all grains served must meet whole grain-rich criteria. For  information on flexibilities, please contact your  State agency. For  all  other Child Nutrition Programs, grains are 
whole grain or enriched or made with enriched or whole-grain meal and/or flour, bran, and/or germ. Under CACFP child and adult meal patterns, and in NSLP/SBP preschool meals, at least one grain
serving  per day must meet whole grain–rich criteria.
2. 
For NSLP and SBP (grades K-12), grain quantities are determined using ounce equivalents (oz eq). All other Child Nutrition Programs determine grain quantities using grains/bread servings. Beginning 
Oct. 1, 2019, grain quantities in  CACFP and  NSLP/SBP infant and  preschool meals will be determined  using oz eq. Some of the following grains may contain more sugar, salt, and/or fat  than others. 
This should be a consideration when deciding how often to  serve them. 
3. 
Allowed in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week in  grades K-12) as specified in §210.10  and at snack service in SFSP. Considered a grain-based  dessert and  cannot count towards the 
grain component in CACFP or NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals  beginning  October 1, 2017, as specified in §§226.20(a)(4)  and 210.10.
4. 
Allowable in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week for grades K-12) as specified in §210.10. May count towards the grain component in SBP (grades K-12) and at snack and breakfast
meals in SFSP. Considered a grain-based  dessert and  cannot count towards the grain  component in  the CACFP and  NSLP/SBP infant and  preschool meals beginning October 1, 2017, as specified in 
§§226.20(a)(4) and 210.10. 
5. 
Allowed in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based dessert per week in  grades K-12) as specified in §210.10. May count towards the grain component in SBP (grades K-12), CACFP, NSLP/SBP infant and
preschool meals, and  SFSP. 
6. 
Refer to program regulations for the appropriate serving size for supplements served  to children  aged  1 through  5 in  the NSLP; breakfast served  in  the SBP, and  meals served  to children  ages 1 
through 5 and adult  participants in the CACFP. Breakfast  cereals are traditionally served as a breakfast  menu item but  may be served in meals  other than breakfast. 
7. 
In the NSLP and SBP, cereals must list a whole grain as the first ingredient and be fortified, or if the cereal is 100 percent  whole grain, fortification is not  required. For CACFP and SFSP, cereals must  be 
whole-grain, enriched, or fortified; cereals served in CACFP and NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals must contain no more than 6 grams of  sugar per dry ounce.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
98
Grains and Breads, cont.
1.  
In NSLP and SBP (grades K-12), all grains served must meet whole grain-rich criteria. For  information  on  flexibilities, please contact your State agency. For all other Child  Nutrition  Programs, grains are 
whole grain or enriched or made with enriched or whole-grain meal and/or flour, bran, and/or germ. Under CACFP child and adult meal patterns, and in NSLP/SBP preschool meals, at least one grain 
serving  per day must meet whole grain–rich criteria. 
2.  
For NSLP and SBP (grades K-12), grain quantities are determined using ounce equivalents (oz eq). All other Child Nutrition Programs determine grain quantities using grains/bread  servings. Beginning 
Oct. 1, 2019, grain quantities in CACFP and NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals will be determined using oz eq. Some of the following grains may contain more sugar, salt, and/or fat than others. 
This should be a consideration when deciding how often to serve them. 
3.  
Allowed in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week in  grades K-12) as specified in §210.10  and at snack service in SFSP. Considered a grain-based  dessert and  cannot count towards the 
grain component in CACFP or NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals beginning October 1, 2017, as specified in §§226.20(a)(4) and 210.10. 
4.  
Allowable in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week for grades K-12) as specified in §210.10. May count towards the grain component in SBP (grades K-12) and at snack and breakfast 
meals in SFSP. Considered a  grain-based  dessert and  cannot count towards the grain  component in  the CACFP and  NSLP/SBP infant and  preschool meals beginning October 1, 2017, as specified in 
§§226.20(a)(4) and 210.10. 
5.  
Allowed in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week in  grades K-12) as specified in §210.10. May count towards the grain component in SBP (grades K-12), CACFP, NSLP/SBP infant and 
preschool meals, and  SFSP. 
6.  
Refer to program regulations for the appropriate serving size for supplements served  to children  aged  1 through  5 in  the NSLP; breakfast served  in  the SBP, and  meals served  to children  ages 1 
through 5 and adult  participants in the CACFP. Breakfast  cereals are traditionally served as a breakfast menu item but may be  served in meals other than breakfast. 
7.  
In the NSLP and SBP, cereals must list a whole grain as the first ingredient and be fortified, or if the cereal is 100 percent  whole grain, fortification is not  required. For CACFP and SFSP, cereals must be 
whole-grain, enriched, or fortified; cereals  served in CACFP and NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals  must contain no more than 6 grams of sugar per dry ounce.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
99
Grains and Breads, cont.
1.  
In NSLP and SBP (grades K-12), all grains served must meet whole  grain-rich criteria. For  information on flexibilities, please contact your  State agency. For  all  other  Child Nutrition Programs, grains are 
whole grain or enriched or made with enriched or whole-grain meal and/or flour, bran, and/or germ. Under CACFP child and adult meal  patterns, and in NSLP/SBP preschool  meals, at least one grain 
serving  per day must meet whole grain–rich criteria. 
2.  
For NSLP and SBP (grades K-12), grain quantities are determined using ounce equivalents (oz eq). All other Child Nutrition  Programs determine grain  quantities using grains/bread  servings. Beginning 
Oct. 1, 2019, grain quantities in CACFP and NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals will be determined using oz eq. Some of the following grains may contain more sugar, salt, and/or fat than others. 
This should be a consideration when deciding how often to  serve them. 
3.  
Allowed in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week in  grades K-12) as specified in §210.10  and at snack service in SFSP. Considered a grain-based  dessert and  cannot count towards the 
grain component in CACFP or NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals  beginning  October 1, 2017, as  specified in §§226.20(a)(4) and 210.10. 
4.  
Allowable in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week for grades K-12) as specified in §210.10. May count towards the  grain component in SBP (grades K-12) and at snack and breakfast 
meals in SFSP. Considered a  grain-based  dessert and  cannot count towards the grain  component in  the CACFP and  NSLP/SBP infant and  preschool meals beginning October 1, 2017, as specified in 
§§226.20(a)(4) and 210.10. 
5.  
Allowed in NSLP (up to 2.0 oz eq grain-based  dessert per week in  grades K-12) as specified in §210.10. May count towards the grain component in SBP (grades K-12), CACFP, NSLP/SBP infant and 
preschool meals, and SFSP. 
6.  
Refer to program regulations for the appropriate serving size for supplements served to children aged 1 through 5 in the NSLP;  breakfast served in the SBP, and meals served to children ages 1 
through 5 and adult  participants in the CACFP. Breakfast cereals are traditionally served as a breakfast menu item but may be served in meals other than breakfast. 
7.  
In the NSLP and SBP, cereals must list a whole grain as the first ingredient and be fortified, or if the cereal is 100 percent  whole grain,  fortification is not required. For CACFP and SFSP,  cereals must be 
whole-grain, enriched, or fortified; cereals  served in CACFP and NSLP/SBP infant and preschool meals  must contain no more than 6 grams of sugar per dry ounce.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
100
Choking Risks
If a child appears to be choking, immediately call 911 and perform first aid as appropriate.
Children under 4 years of age are at the greatest risk of choking. Young children are still learning how to chew  
properly, and often  swallow things whole. Some foods are easy for young children to choke on because they  
are the same size and shape as a  child’s airway. For example, a  whole grape may completely block the upper  
airway in young children. It is important to make sure that food is served in the appropriate sizes, shapes, and  
textures to reduce the risk of choking. Always supervise children during meals and  snacks.
Common foods that may cause choking include the following:
Firm, smooth, or slippery foods that slide  down the throat before  chewing, such as:
•  Whole grapes, cherries, berries, melon balls, or cherry and grape tomatoes 
•  Peanuts and nuts 
•  Whole pieces of canned  fruit 
•  Whole beans 
•  Hot dog-shaped foods, including sausages, meat sticks, cheese sticks, or toddler hot dogs  (even when 
cut into round slices) 
•  Hard or round candy, jelly beans
Small, dry, or hard foods that are difficult to chew and easy to swallow whole, such as:
•  Popcorn 
•  Peanuts, nuts,  and seeds (like sunflower or pumpkin seeds) 
•  Hard pretzels 
•  Plain wheat germ 
•  Potato and corn chips,  or other similar snack foods 
•  Crackers or breads with seeds, nut pieces, or whole-grain kernels 
•  Small pieces of raw vegetable (like raw carrot rounds, baby carrots, string beans, or celery), or other 
raw or partially cooked hard vegetables 
•  Apples or other hard pieces of raw fruit, especially those with hard pits or seeds 
•  Cooked or raw whole-kernel corn 
•  Whole-grain kernels (like rice, wheat berries) 
•  Raw green peas
Sticky or tough foods that do not break apart easily and are hard to remove from the airway, such as:
•  Chunks or spoonfuls of peanut butter or nut and seed butters 
•  Fish with bones 
•  Large, hard pieces of uncooked  dried  fruits or vegetables 
•  Caramels, gum drops, and gummy candies, or other gooey or sticky candy 
•  Tough meat or large chunks of meat 
•  Chewing gum 
•  Large chunks of cheese, especially string cheese 
•  Chewy fruit snacks 
•  Marshmallows
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
101
Choking Risks, cont.
Reduce the risk  of choking on some foods by changing their shape, size, or texture. Simple tips for 
making these foods safe options for children include:
•  Cook foods until they are soft enough to pierce easily with a fork. Steam carrots or celery until slightly 
soft, and then cut into sticks. 
•  Cut soft food into thin slices or small pieces—no larger than one-half inch ( ½  inch). Cut soft, round 
foods, like hot dogs or string cheese, into short strips rather than round pieces. 
•  Remove all bones from fish, chicken, and meat before cooking. 
•  Cut grapes, cherries, or melon balls into small pieces. 
•  Chop peanuts, nuts and seeds finely or grind before adding to prepared  foods. 
•  Spread peanut butter, nut butter, or seed butter thinly on crackers. Or, mix with applesauce and 
cinnamon and spread thinly on bread. Use only creamy, not chunky, peanut, nut, and seed butters.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
102
How to Read Nutrition Labels
Nutrition labels, called “Nutrition Facts”, appear on almost  all food products. You may not  see them on 
institutional packs because foods packaged in large size containers for food service are currently not required 
to show these labels. In this case, inserts or fact sheet information may be provided by the  manufacturer.
The Nutrition Facts label gives standard serving sizes for adults. Therefore, the amounts should be adjusted for 
child size portions, according to meal pattern minimum quantity requirements. The number of servings, the 
number of calories per serving, and  the number of calories from fat would  be similarly adjusted.
Nutrient  information on the Nutrition Facts label includes:  total calories, calories from fat, total fat, saturated 
fat, trans fat, cholesterol, sodium, total carbohydrate (including dietary fiber and sugars), and protein based on 
an established serving size. “Daily Values” are shown in percentages and are based on an adult’s daily intake of 
2,000 calories. Keep in mind that  the calorie needs vary by age, gender, and level of physical activity. Children 
often need less than 2,000 calories a day. Visit ChooseMyPlate.gov to  learn more about calorie needs.
The Nutrition Facts Label at a Glance
The Nutrition Facts label carries an up-to-date, easy to use nutrition information  guide, required  on  almost all 
packaged  foods. The guide serves as a key to help in planning a healthy diet. Here are some tips to help you  
read and understand the Nutrition Facts label to  make quick and healthy food choices.
4. Get enough of these nutrients 
Most Americans do not get enough fiber, Vitamin A, 
Vitamin C, calcium, and iron in their diet. Eating enough 
of  these nutrients can help improve your  health and 
reduce the risk of some diseases and conditions.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1. Serving Size 
The first place to start when you look at the Nutrition 
Facts label is the serving information. This tells you the 
serving size and the number of servings  in the package.
2. Calories 
Next, check the number of calories per serving. The 
number of  servings you eat determines how many 
calories you actually consume. If you double the 
amount of servings you eat or serve, then you double 
the calories and nutrients consumed.
3. Limit these nutrients 
In general, Americans eat too much fat, cholesterol, 
and sodium.
103
How to Read Nutrition Labels, cont.
5. Footnote 
The footnote at the bottom  of the Nutrition Facts label tells you the daily recommend intake for each nutrient. 
These are known as Daily Values (DVs). DVs in the footnote are based on a 2,000 and 2,500 calorie diet.
6. % Daily Values 
The % Daily Values (%DVs) are based on the Daily Value recommendations for key nutrients for a 2,000 calorie 
diet. The %DV helps you determine if a serving of a food  is high or low in  a nutrient. As a guide, if you want to 
consume less of a nutrient (such as saturated fat or sodium), choose foods with a  lower % DV of 5% or less. If you 
want to consume more of a nutrient (such as fiber),  seek foods  with a higher % DV of 20% or more.
Reference: Information adapted from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the American Heart Association.
An Updated Nutrition Facts Label is Coming to a Store Near You!
In 2016, the U.S.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced an updated Nutrition Facts label for packed 
foods. It will make it easier for consumers to  make better informed food choices. Some manufacturers have 
already started using the new label on their products. Key changes to the Nutrition Facts label include:
For more information, check out FDA’s web page 
on the updated  Nutrition  Facts label: 
https://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/ 
GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Labe 
lingNutrition/ucm385663.htm.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1. A refreshed design 
• 
The iconic look of the label remains. 
There is an increased type size for 
“Calories”, “servings per container”, and 
the “Serving size” declaration, and 
bolding the number of calories  and the 
“Serving size”  declaration.
2. Reflects updated information about nutrition 
science
• 
“Added sugars”  in grams and as percent 
Daily Value will be included on the label. 
• 
Vitamin D and potassium will appear on 
the label. 
• 
“Calories from Fat” is being removed.
104
Serving Sizes and Yields for Vegetables
This chart is a snapshot of commonly used vegetables that  can be found in the USDA Food Buying Guide for 
Child Nutrition Programs. The information in the Food Buying Guide can assist you in menu planning and 
purchasing. An interactive version is available online at:  https://foodbuyingguide.fns.usda.gov.
VEGETABLE 
SIZE AND COUNT 
SERVING SIZE
Specify U.S. #1 carrots with 1- ⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ in. medium diameter -about 7 
 ½  ½ 
 ½ in. length, 6 per pound, various bag sizes available (1, 2, 5, 10, 
25, and 50 pound bags.)
Carrot Stick
Cauliflower 
Specify in cartons of 18-24 pounds, or wire-bound  crates of 
45-50  pounds. 
1 medium head = about 6  cups 
florets
Celery Sticks 
Specify 2, 2  ½  ½ 
 ½ , or 3 dozen per crate. Crates weigh 60-70 
pounds net.
Specify 2 in. minimum diameter. This information will be 
stamped on the basket. Cucumbers  will vary from 2 in. to 2  ½  ½ 
 ½ 
in. in diameter and are about 7   ½  ½ 
 ½ in. long.
Cucumber Sticks
Lettuce Head 
(Iceberg)  
Specify 2 dozen heads, weight of 40-48 pounds.
Lettuce, Leaf 
Specify 2 dozen heads, weight 18 pounds. 
 ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup raw vegetable pieces
Olives, Ripe 
Large 
8 olives =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
Pickles, Dill 
Specify large size, 4 to 4  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ in. long, 22 to 39 count per gallon. 
1/3 pickle =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
Pickles, Sweet 
Specify small size, 2  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ to 3  ½  ½ 
 ½ in. long, 52 to 99 count per 
gallon. 
1 pickle =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
Radishes 
Specify U.S. #1,  ½  ½ 
 ½ in. diameter minimum, without tops, small  
size, 45 radishes per pound. 
7 small radishes =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
Tomatoes 
Specify large or extra-large, 30 pound net per container. 
Tomato is 2  ½  ½ 
 ½ in. x 2  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ in. diameter; sliced  ⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ inch.
Slices 
Specify small or medium tomatoes, 2  ⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ in. 
to 2  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ in. diameter.
Cherry 
Specify standard size, (California or Arizona) or size 
125 (Texas). 
3  tomatoes = about  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
105
AND YIELD
1 stick is 4 in. long and  ½  ½ 
 ½ in. wide. 
3 sticks =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
1 stick is 4  in. long and  ½  ½ 
 ½ in. wide. 
3 sticks =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
1  stick is 3  in. long and  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ in. wide. 
3 sticks (pared or unpared) =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup raw, shredded vegetable OR 
 ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup raw vegetable pieces
¼ ¼
¼ 
 
 
 
 
 ¼
4  slices, 1 ⅛ 
 ⅛ in. thick = 1 ¼ 
 ¼ cup
5  slices,  ⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ in. thick =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
Serving Sizes and Yields for Fruits
This chart is a  snapshot of commonly used fruits that can be found in the USDA Food Buying Guide for Child 
Nutrition Programs. The information in the Food Buying Guide can assist you in menu planning and purchasing.
FRUIT 
SIZE AND COUNT 
SERVING SIZE
Apples 
Specify size: 125-138 count, whole, or 
100 count, whole.
Bananas 
Institutional pack, 150 per case, three to four bananas per 
pound. 
1  banana =  ⅜  ⅜ 
 ⅜ cup
Blueberries 
Specify U.S. #1, sold in pints, fresh. 1 pint AP = about 2  ⅔  ⅔ 
 ⅔ 
cups EP.
Strawberries 
Specify U.S. #1, minimum diameter  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ in, sold in quarts and 
pints.
Cantalope 
Specify size 18, 5 in. diameter, approximately 30 oz. per 
melon.
Grapes 
Specify variety desired.
With Seeds 
6  grapes = about ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup; 
12 grapes = ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
Seedless 
7  grapes = about  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup; 
14 grapes = ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
Nectarines 
Specify size 88 (2  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ in. diameter) approximately 4 per 
pound. 
1 nectarine = about ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
Medium size 
Specify size 56 and 64 (2  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ in. diameter). 
1  nectarine = about  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cup
Oranges 
Specify size 138 or 113 (California or Arizona) or size 125 
(Florida or Texas).
Peaches 
Specify size 84 (2 ⅛  ⅛ 
 ⅛ in. diameter - box may state 2 to 2  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ in. 
diameter); approximately
1  peach = about  ⅜  ⅜ 
 ⅜ cup
Pears 
Specify size 150 (2  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ to 2  ⅜  ⅜ 
 ⅜ )  in. diameter. 
1  pear = about  ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
Medium size 
Specify size 120; approximately 3 per pound. 
1  pear = about  ¾  ¾ 
 ¾ cup
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
106
AND YIELD
¼  ¼ 
 ¼ raw, unpeeled apple = about ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ 
cup
1/5 raw, unpeeled apple = about ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ 
cup
¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup measure
½  ½ 
 ½ cup measure
⅒  ⅒ 
 ⅒ 
medium  melon =  ¼  ¼ 
 ¼ cup
1 orange (size 113/125) = about ⅝  ⅝ 
 ⅝ 
cup 
1  orange (size 138) = about ½  ½ 
 ½ cup
Serving Sizes and Yields for Fruits, cont.
SERVING SIZE 
FRUIT 
SIZE AND COUNT 
AND YIELD
Plums
Specify size 45 and 50 (2 in. diameter) 
1 plum = about  ½ cup
Medium size 
Specify size 60 and 65. 
1 plum = about  ⅜  cups
Yield of Bulk:
Raisins
Specify bulk purchase or individual packages 
1.3  to 1.5 ounce package = ¼ cup 
1 lb. = 12.6- ¼ cup servings
Tangerine
Specify size 120 count. 
1 tangerine = about ⅜  cup
¼ cup fruit or  ¼ cup diced  fruit 
Watermelon 
Specify average size, melons will average about 27 pounds. 
without rind
*  Any serving size may be  planned. For simplicity, this table of serving sizes and yields for vegetables and fruits 
provides  ¼  cup servings of vegetables and a variety of cup servings of fruits.
Note: Sponsors/sites that prepare meals for a smaller number of children might find the third column (Serving 
Size and Yield)  more appropriate for the size of their program, rather than initially referring to the second 
column (Size and Count).
Where sizes are specified for fruits, they indicate numbers of fruit in the box. The larger the number, the smaller 
the fruit. Any fruit  that  is larger than that  specified may be used.
For more information, refer to the USDA Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition Programs:  
http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/food-buying-guide-for-child-nutrition-programs.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
107
Keep These Food Safety Rules in Mind
• 
Keep hot foods at 135 °F or above.
• 
Keep cold foods at 41°F or below.
• 
Be sure thermometers are available and use them properly.
• 
Avoid handling ready-to-eat food, such as sandwiches and salads, with bare hands. Follow local health 
regulations for using disposable plastic gloves.
• 
Promptly refrigerate or freeze leftovers. Divide large quantities into smaller containers or use shallow 
pans, and  cover loosely for quick cooling. Once cooled, tightly cover and date the leftovers.
• 
Reheat leftovers to at least 165 °F.
• 
Thaw poultry and meat in a refrigerator and not on counters. Refreeze only if ice crystals are still 
present.
• 
When not being served, keep meals and milk in  the refrigerator or cooler at a temperature of 41 °F or 
below. Hot meals should  be in  a warming unit or insulated box at a holding temperature of 135°F or 
above.
• 
Any leftover, unopened milk cartons from a meal or left on a share table must be held at the proper  
temperature and served at  the next  meal.
• 
Empty garbage cans daily. They should be kept tightly covered and thoroughly cleaned. Use plastic or 
paper liners.
• 
Remember that you cannot determine food safety by sight, taste, odor, or smell. If there is any doubt, 
throw the food away.
• 
Follow instructions exactly on how to use and clean kitchen equipment.
• 
Train food service employees on the safe use of all types of equipment and  on personal hygiene.
• 
Keep a fire  extinguisher and first-aid kit handy and instruct all personnel in their use.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
108
Food Service Equipment Needs
EQUIPMENT 
NUMBER OF  CHILDREN
1  - 50 
51  - 100 
101  - 200 
201  - 300
1  range with oven; 30” 
domestic or 30” – 36” 
commercial
Range with 
ventilating hood
(2 burners)
single section 
domestic 18 cu. ft. or 
commercial reach-in 
20-25  cu. ft.
Refrigerator 
with shelves
Freezer 
same as  refrigerator 
same as  refrigerator 
same as  refrigerator 
same as  refrigerator
Work Tables
(Allow 4 linear 
ft./worker). 
Use countertops 
as tables
1  table 
2  tables 
3  tables 
4  tables
Sink with 
separate hand 
sink
1  sink - 3 
compartments
If the site will serve over 100 children, the following equipment is recommended to supplement 
the minimum items listed above:
• 
Steam equipment (kettle, steamer) 
• 
Hot food holding cabinet 
• 
Convection oven 
• 
Microwave oven 
• 
Electric food slicer 
• 
Mixer with attachments (vegetable slicer/shredder, meat and food chopper)
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
1  range with oven 
30” – 36” commercial
1  range with oven 
30” – 36” commercial
(2 if over 150 
children)
(4 burners)
(6 burners)
double section 
commercial reach-in 
50-60  cu. ft. 
or 64 sq. ft. 
(8 ft. x 8 ft.) 
walk-in
double section 
commercial reach-in 
40-50  cu. ft.
1  sink - 3 
compartments
1  sink - 3 
compartments
109
2  ranges with ovens 
30” – 36” commercial 
or 1 range w/oven 
60” or larger 
commercial
(8 burners)
triple section 
commercial reach-in 
60-75  cu. ft. or 
64  sq. ft. 
(8 ft. x 8 ft.) 
walk-in
1  sink - 3 
compartments
Sample Food Inventory Record
Name:
Date: 
/ 
/
Beginning inventory: $
1. Food item 
2. Purchase unit-  
size & description
(case, bag, can, lb.)
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
3. # of units on hand 
4. Unit cost 
5. Total cost
Ending inventory 
$
110
Food Inventory Record Instructions
The value of the beginning inventory is determined by taking a physical count before the food service 
operation begins. The value of the beginning inventory in each subsequent month is the same as the ending 
inventory for the previous month.
A  complete physical inventory of all purchased foods, commodities, and supplies on hand should be taken 
at the end of the tracking period.
For ease in taking a physical count of foods in storage, arrange the items according to food groups in the 
storage  area and arrange each group in alphabetical order, for example, canned fruits and fruit juices -
apples, apricots, etc. Store food in cases, boxes, or other containers marked with the date received and 
cost per unit to facilitate the taking of inventories.
Column l. Enter the name of the food item, such as asparagus, green beans, or mustard.
Column 2. Enter the pack size, such as  6/#10 case, #50 bag, or #10 can. If different size containers  of the 
same food item are on hand, use a separate line for  each size and a separate line for each different unit 
cost of the same pack size.
Column 3. Enter the number of units (of the size shown in column 2) found on hand from  actual count.
Column 4. Enter the unit cost for the size unit shown in column 2 (use the unit  cost  written on package 
or  unit).
Column 5. Obtain the total cost by multiplying the number of units (column 3) by the unit cost (column  4) 
and enter in column 5. Add column 5 (total cost) on all pages for the inventory at the end of the month. This 
total is the value of  the ending inventory, and becomes the beginning inventory for the following month.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
111
Sample Specification Bid
Purchase Unit: Number 10 can, 6 cans per case
Yellow cling peaches should have reasonably uniform color that is practically free from any brown color 
due to oxidation. They should  be reasonably uniform in  size and symmetry and  be reasonably free 
from defects such as blemished, broken, crushed units, and peel. Units should be reasonably tender 
and have texture typical of properly ripened fruits, not more than slight fraying.
Watch for: Off-color or wide-color variation. Excessive variation in size, symmetry, and thickness. 
Discoloration, excessive softness, or hard units. Crushed or broken pieces, presence of excessive loose 
pits, stems, and leaves.
For further guidance  on procurement, contact your State agency.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
PEACHES, CLING
Style: Halves, Slices
Type: Yellow, Cling
Grade: U.S. Grade B (Choice)
Count: 36-54 Halves
Packing Medium:  Juice Pack
Net Weight: 108  ounces
Drained Weight: 66 ½ ounces
112
Sample Daily Temperature Form – 
Internal Food Temperatures
Date 
Food Item 
Temperature/ 
Temperature/ 
Temperature/
Source: National Food Service Management Institute. (2009). Serving it safe training resource, Appendix 3. University, MS.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Time/
Time/
Initials
Initials
113
Time/
Initials
Storage Temperature Form
Date 
Food Item 
Temperature/ 
Temperature/ 
Temperature/
Source: National Food Service Management Institute. (2009). Serving it safe training resource, Appendix 4.  University, MS.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Time/
Time/
Initials
Initials
114
Time/
Initials
RESOURCE 
SECTION
•  INFORMATIONAL RESOURCES
•  ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
•  FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICE 
REGIONAL OFFICES
•  STATE CONTACT INFORMATION
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
115
Informational Resources
THE INSTITUTE OF CHILD NUTRITION (ICN) 
(800)  321-3054 
The Institute of Child Nutrition (ICN), located at 
the University of Mississippi, is committed to 
improving the operation and quality of all Child 
Nutrition Programs, including children served in 
SFSP. This is accomplished through staff 
development programs, training experiences, 
educational materials, and a national satellite  
network. The Institute is funded  through USDA’s 
Food and Nutrition Service.
For information on food service, food preparation, 
meeting the Dietary Guidelines, or available videos 
and training packages, contact the ICN’s 
clearinghouse at 800-321-3054, or write:
Institute of Child Nutrition 
University of Mississippi 
P.O. Box 1848 
6  Jeanette Phillips Drive 
University, MS 38677 
Website:  http://www.theicn.org/
FOOD AND NUTRITION  INFORMATION  
CENTER (FNIC) 
(301)  504-5414 
The Food and Nutrition Information Center (FNIC) 
is located at USDA’s National  Agricultural  Library in 
Beltsville, Maryland. Sample nutrition education 
and training materials are available at FNIC. Food 
labeling material  is also available. On-line 
bibliographies are offered  to assist with  research. 
For more information, you can call or write:
USDA/NAL/FNIC 
10301  Baltimore Avenue, Room 108 
Beltsville, MD 20705 
Phone: (301) 504-5414 
Website: http://fnic.nal.usda.gov/
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
NUTRITION.GOV 
Additional online information geared toward 
consumers can be found at 
http://www.Nutrition.gov.  The website provides 
easy, online access to government information on 
food and nutrition for consumers.
USDA NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD AND 
AGRICULTURE (NIFA) 
The USDA National Institute of Food and 
Agriculture (NIFA) offers contacts for State 
extension services for information and possible 
SFSP partnering opportunities. NIFA replaced the 
former Cooperative State Research, Education, 
and Extension Service (CSREES). Website: 
https://www.nifa.usda.gov/
THE NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION IN 
MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH 
The National Center for Education in Maternal and 
Child Health (NCEMCH) offers publications on 
nutrition, maternal health, child  health, and  
children with special health care needs.
National Center for Education in Maternal 
and Child Health 
2115  Wisconsin Avenue, NW 
Suite 601 
Washington, DC 20007 
Phone: (202) 784-9770 
Website: www.ncemch.org/
Maternal and Child Health Knowledge  
Base:  
https://www.ncemch.org/knowledge-
base.php
116
Additional Resources
Contact your State’s administering agency for assistance in obtaining any of the 
following publications:
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015-2020,  USDA and Department of Health and Human Services. Online at 
http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/.
Food Buying Guide  for Child Nutrition Programs,  USDA/FNS,  Revised July 2017. Online at 
https://foodbuyingguide.fns.usda.gov/.
The Healthy School Meals Resource System provides information to  people working with the USDA’s Child 
Nutrition Programs. Online at  http://healthymeals.nal.usda.gov/.
USDA Recipes for Schools and Child Care,  online at https://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/team-nutrition-recipes-
and-cookbook-toolkit.
Food Safety for Summer Meals,  National Food Service Management Institute,  2003. Designed to help staff and 
volunteers of Summer Food Service Programs learn ways to provide safe foods and teach children basic food 
safety practices. Available online at https://theicn.org/icn-resources-a-z/foodsafety-for-summermeals/.
HACCP-Based Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), National Food Service Management  Institute, 2005. 
Foodservice SOPs are written practices and procedures and are the basic ingredient to producing safe food. It is 
essential to train employees and emphasize  the importance of following the  procedures. These SOPs are  available 
in both Microsoft Word® format (.doc) and Adobe® Acrobat® Portable Document Format (.pdf). Available online 
at: https://theicn.org/icn-resources-a-z/standard-operating-procedures/.
The Food Code,  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  Public Health Service, Food and Drug 
Administration, 2013. Available online at 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/GuidanceRegulation/RetailFoodProtection/FoodCode/UCM374510.pdf.
Is It Done Yet? – Food safety program to promote the use of food  thermometers when cooking all meat and 
poultry products. Online at https://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/topics/food-safety-education/teach-
others/fsis-educational-campaigns/is-it-done-yet.
USDA, Food Safety and Inspection Service. Consumer Education information and publications are available online 
at http://www.fsis.usda.gov.
FightBAC – Partnership for Food Safety Education. Online at http://www.fightbac.org.
Thermy – a  national campaign to promote the use of food thermometers. Available online at 
https://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/topics/food-safety-education/teach-others/fsis-educational-
campaigns/thermy.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
117
Additional Resources, cont.
Summer Food Service Program  website,  online at: 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/summer-food-service-program.
Summer Food, Summer Moves (http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/summer-food-summer-moves).
The Summer Food, Summer Moves Resource Kit is a fun, hands-on resource kit designed to  get kids and families 
excited about healthy eating and physical activity during the  summer months. The  kit is designed for use by 
summer meal site operators  and focuses  on using music, games, art, and movement to motivate kids and families 
to choose more fruits and vegetables, choose water instead of sugary drinks, get enough physical activity every 
day, and  to limit screen  time.
Offering Healthy Summer Meals That Kids Enjoy—Handout (http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/offering-healthy-
summer-meals).
The Offering Healthy Summer Meals That Kids Enjoy handout is a colorful 4-page resource for Summer Meal 
Program operators,  which provides practical  ideas for small changes that sites can implement to improve the 
nutritional quality of meals they serve, and  ways to make foods more appealing to children  and teens. This 
handout offers ideas for every type of site, including sample menus, a taste test  ballot, tips to engage volunteers 
and staff, and strategies to incorporate a  variety of fruits, vegetables, protein options, and local foods.
Take a Healthy Summer Break Infographic (https://fns-
prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/tn/sfsm_infographic.pdf).
The Take a Healthy Summer Break Infographic is a colorful 1-page resource that schools and  community groups 
can distribute to parents to increase awareness of  the importance of healthy choices during the summer  months. 
This infographic includes illustrations and statistics and offers practical solutions for busy families to make 
healthier food, beverage, and physical activity choices over the summer. The infographic is English on one side and 
Spanish on the reverse.
This Summer, Eat Smart to Play Hard: A Parent’s Guide (http://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/summer-eat-smart-play-
hard-parents-guide).
This Summer, Eat Smart to Play Hard: A Parent’s Guide is a 6-page color brochure that schools and  community 
groups can distribute to parents to increase awareness of the importance of healthy food choices and physical 
activity during the summer months. The guide encourages families to choose water instead of sugar-sweetened 
beverages, choose more fruits and vegetables, increase physical activity, and  decrease screen time. The guide also 
contains a tasty summer-themed recipe and encourages families to engage in a healthy and fun “family 
challenge.” The guides are in both English and Spanish.
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
118
Food and Nutrition Service 
Regional Offices
Mid-Atlantic Regional Office 
Mercer Corporate Park 
300  Corporate Boulevard 
Robbinsville, NJ 08691-1518 
(609)  259-5025
Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, 
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, 
Virgin Islands, West Virginia
Midwest Regional Office 
77  West Jackson Boulevard, 20th Floor 
Chicago, IL 60604-3507 
(312)  353-6664
Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, 
Wisconsin
Mountain  Plains Regional Office 
1244  Speer Boulevard 
Suite 903 
Denver, CO 80204-3581 
(303)  844-0354
Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, 
Wyoming
Northeast Regional Office 
10  Causeway Street 
Room 501 
Boston,  MA 02222-1069 
(617)  565-6370
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, Vermont
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Southeast Regional Office 
61  Forsyth Street SW 
Room 8T36 
Atlanta, GA  30303-3427 
(404)  562-1801/1802
Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, 
North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee
Southwest Regional Office 
1100  Commerce Street 
Room 522 
Dallas, TX 75242-9800 
(214)  290-9925
Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, 
Texas
Western Regional Office 
90  Seventh Street 
Suite 10-100 
San Francisco, CA 94103 
(415)  705-1310
Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii, Idaho, 
Nevada, Oregon, Washington, Guam Trust 
Territories, Commonwealth of the Northern 
Mariana Islands, American Samoa
119
State Contact Information
Alabama Department of Education 
http://www.alsde.edu/ 
Phone: 334-242-1988 
Fax: 334-353-5388
Alaska Department of Education & 
Early Development 
http://www.eed.state.ak.us/tls/cnp/ 
Phone: 907-465-4788 
Fax: 907-465-8910
Arizona Department of Education 
http://www.azed.gov/health-
nutrition/ 
Phone: 602-542-8700 
Fax: 602-542-3818
Arkansas Department of Human 
Services 
https://dhs.arkansas.gov/dccece/snp 
/WelcomeSNPM.aspx 
Phone: 800-482-5850 ext 28869 
Fax: 501-682-2334
California Department of Education 
http://www.cde.ca.gov/fg/aa/nt/ 
Phone: 800-482-5850 ext 28869 
Fax: 501-682-2334
Colorado Department of Education 
http://www.cde.state.co.us/index_n 
utrition.htm 
Phone: 303-866-6934 
Fax: 303-866-6663
Connecticut Department of 
Education 
http://www.sde.ct.gov/sde/site/defa 
ult.asp 
Phone: 860-807-2050 
Fax: 860-807-2127
DC Office of the State 
Superintendent of Education 
http://www.osse.dc.gov 
Phone: 202-741-5252 
Fax: 202-724-7656
Delaware Department of Education 
http://www.doe.k12.de.us 
Phone: 302-735-4060 
Fax: 302-739-4654
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Louisiana Department of Education 
http://www.louisianabelieves.com/ 
Phone: 225-342-3720 
Fax: 225-342-3305
Florida Department of Agriculture & 
Consumer Services 
http://www.freshforfloridakids.com/ 
Phone: 800-504-6609 
Fax: 850-617-7402
Maine Department of Education 
http://www.maine.gov/doe/ 
Phone: 207-624-7909 
Fax: 207-624-6841
Georgia Department of Early Care 
and Learning 
http://decal.ga.gov/ 
Phone: 404-656-5957 
Fax: 404-651-7184
Maryland Department of Education 
http://www.marylandpublicschools.or 
g/programs/Pages/School-Community-
Nutrition/index.aspx 
Phone: 410-767-0199 
Fax: 410-333-2635
Hawaii Department of Education 
http://hcnp.hawaii.gov/overview/sfs 
p/ 
Phone: 808-587-3600 
Fax: 808-587-3606
Massachusetts Department of 
Elementary &  Secondary Education 
http://www.doe.mass.edu/cnp/nprogr 
ams/sfsp/ 
Phone: 781-338-6480 
Fax: 781-338-3399
Idaho Department of Education 
http://sde.idaho.gov/cnp/sfsp/ 
Phone: 800-432-4601 
Fax: 208-334-2228
Michigan Department of Education 
http://www.michigan.gov/mde/0,4615 
,7-140-66254---,00.html 
Phone: 517-373-4013 
Fax: 517-373-4022
Illinois State Board of Education 
http://sde.idaho.gov/cnp/sfsp/ 
Phone: 800-545-7892 
Fax: 217-524-6124
Indiana Department of  Education 
http://www.doe.in.gov/student-
services/nutrition 
Phone: 317-232-0850 
Fax: 317-232-0855
Minnesota Department of Education 
https://education.mn.gov/MDE/index. 
html 
Phone: 651-582-8543 
Fax: 651-582-8501
Iowa Department of  Education 
http://educateiowa.gov/ 
Phone: 515-281-4757 
Fax: 515-281-6548
Mississippi Department of Education 
http://www.mde.k12.ms.us/OCN/SFSP 
Phone: 601-576-5005 
Fax: 601-576-1417
Kansas Department of Education 
http://cnw-
web.ksde.org/CNWPortal_Web/CNW 
/CNW_Menus/index.htm 
Phone: 785-296-2276 
Fax: 785-296-0232
Missouri Department of Health & 
Senior Services 
http://www.dhss.mo.gov 
Phone: 573-751-6269 
Fax: 573-526-3679
Montana Division of Health 
Enhancement and  Safety 
http://opi.mt.gov/Educators/School-
Climate-Student-Wellness/Health-
Physical-Education 
Phone: 406-444-2501 
Fax: 406-444-2955
Kentucky  Department of Education 
http://education.ky.gov/federal/SCN/ 
Pages/Summer-Food-Service-
Program-(SFSP).aspx 
Phone: 502-564-5625 
Fax: 502-564-5519
120
Nebraska Department of Education 
http://www.education.ne.gov/NS/i 
ndex.html 
Phone: 402-471-3566 
Fax: 402-471-4407
Nevada Department of Agriculture 
http://nutrition.nv.gov/Programs/S 
ummer_Food_Program_(SFSP)/ 
Phone: 775-353-3600 
Fax: 775-353-3661
New Hampshire Department of 
Education 
http://education.nh.gov/program/n 
utrition/food_svc.htm 
Phone: 603-271-3494 
Fax: 603-271-1953
New Jersey Department of 
Agriculture 
http://www.state.nj.us/agriculture/ 
divisions/fn/ 
Phone: 609-984-0692 
Fax: 609-984-0878
New Mexico Children Youth  & 
Families Department 
https://cyfd.org/family-nutrition 
Phone: 505-827-9961 
Fax: 505-827-9957
New York State Education 
Department 
http://portal.nysed.gov/portal/page 
/portal/CNKC 
Phone: 518-473-8781 
Fax: 518-473-0018
North Carolina Department of 
Public Instruction 
http://childnutrition.ncpublicschool 
s.gov/programs/summer-nutrition-
opportunities 
Phone: 919-807-3507 
Fax: 919-807-3516
North Dakota Department of 
Public Instruction 
http://www.dpi.state.nd.us/child/p 
rograms.shtm 
Phone: 701-328-4565 
Fax: 701-328-2461
one
-
-
Phone: 877
6338
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
Ohio Department of Education 
http://education.ohio.gov/Topics/Other 
-Resources/Food-and-
Nutrition/Summer-Food-Service-
Program 
Phone: 877-644-6338 
Fax: 614-752-7613
Oklahoma Department of Education 
http://sde.ok.gov/sde/child-nutrition-
programs 
Phone: 405-521-3327 
Fax: 405-521-2239
Oregon Department of Education 
https://www.oregon.gov/ode/students-
and-
family/childnutrition/Pages/default.aspx 
Phone: 503-947-5600 
Fax: 503-378-5156
Pennsylvania Department  of Education 
http://www.education.pa.gov/Teachers 
%20-%20Administrators/Food-
Nutrition/Pages/Summer-Food-Service-
Program.aspx 
Phone: 800-331-0129 
Fax: 717-787-7698
Puerto Rico Child Nutrition Program 
150  Federico Costa St. 
Phone: 787-773-6273 
Fax: 787-753-8155
Rhode Island Department of Education 
http://www.ride.ri.gov/cnp/NutritionPr 
ograms/SummerFoodServiceProgram.as 
px 
Phone: 401-222-4253 
Fax: 401-222-6163
South Carolina Department of 
Education 
http://ed.sc.gov/districts-
schools/nutrition/summer-food-
program/ 
Phone: 803-734-8194 
Fax: 803-737-4148
South Dakota Department of Education 
http://doe.sd.gov/cans/sfsp.aspx 
Phone: 605-773-4746 
Fax: 605-773-6846
121
Tennessee Department of 
Human Services 
http://www.education.pa.gov/Teachers 
%20-%20Administrators/Food-
Nutrition/Pages/Summer-Food-Service-
Program.aspx 
Phone: 615-313-4749 
Fax: 615-741-4165
Texas Department of Agriculture 
http://www.squaremeals.org 
Phone: 877-839-6325 
Fax: 888-203-6593
Utah State Office of Education 
https://www.schools.utah.gov/cnp 
Phone: 801-538-7513 
Fax: 801-538-7883
Vermont Agency of Education 
http://education.vermont.gov/student-
support/nutrition/summer-food-service 
Phone: 802-479-1207 
Fax: 804-479-1822
Virgin Islands Department  of Education 
http://www.vide.vi/our-
divisions/special-nutrition.html 
Phone: 340-774-0100, ext 2811 
Fax: 340-774-9705
Virginia Department of Health 
http://www.vdh.virginia.gov/summer-
food-service-program/ 
Phone: 804-864-7800 
Fax: 804-864-7853
Washington Office of Superintendent 
of Public Instruction 
http://www.k12.wa.us/childnutrition 
Phone: 360-725-6200 
Fax: 360-664-9397
West Virginia Department of Education 
http://wvde.state.wv.us/child-nutrition/ 
Phone: 304-558-2708 
Fax: 304-558-1149
Wisconsin Department of 
Public Instruction 
http://dpi.wi.gov/community-
nutrition/sfsp 
Phone: 608-266-7124 
Phone: 608-267-9123
Wyoming Department of Education 
https://edu.wyoming.gov/beyond-
theclassroom/nutrition/summer-food/
Phone: 307 777 7168
through their guidance portal, except to establish historical facts.
incorporated into a contract. USDA may not cite, use, or rely on any guidance that is not available
Guidance documents lack the force and effect of law, unless expressly authorized by statute or
122